---
eip: 2489
title: Deprecate the GAS opcode
author: Alex Beregszaszi (@axic)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-2489-deprecate-the-gas-opcode/3958
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2019-12-20
---

## Abstract

Deprecate `GAS` in a *somewhat* backwards compatible way, by making it always return all bits set.

## Motivation

The `GAS` opcode has been traditionally used to determine the remaining gas and was utilised by contracts to calculate
how much gas to pass to during a call. This requirement was changed with [Tangerine Whistle](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-608),
which introduced the "63/64th rule", no longer requiring exact calculation of gas to be passed via calls.

The network has undergone several gas cost changes during the years, but existing contract, including those using
hard coded calculations, could not be updated.

TBD

## Specification

If `block.number >= FORK_BLOCK`, the `GAS` (`0x5a`) instruction always returns `0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF`.

## Rationale

It would be possible just to remove the opcode and exceptionally abort if it is encountered.
That would however cause a lot of to fail.

## Backwards Compatibility

This is a breaking change and has a potential to break contracts. The author expects no contracts of any value
should be affected.

## Test Cases

TBA

## Implementation

TBA

## Security Considerations

TBA

## References

This was first proposed on the "Stateless Ethereum" discussion and was motivated by the [UNGAS discussion](https://ethereum.corepaper.org/compatibility/forward/#remove-gas-observables-and-better-error-handling).

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
