---
eip: 7410
title: ERC-20 Update Allowance By Spender
description: Extension to enable revoking and decreasing allowance approval by spender for ERC-20
author: Mohammad Zakeri Rad (@zakrad), Adam Boudjemaa (@aboudjem), Mohamad Hammoud (@mohamadhammoud)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/erc20-extension-update-allowance-by-spender/15222
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-07-26
requires: 20, 165
---

## Abstract

This extension adds a update allowance mechanism to [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) allowances, in which a spender can revoke or decrease a given allowance by a specific address. This EIP extends [ERC-20](./eip-20.md).

## Motivation

Currently, [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) tokens offer allowances, enabling token owners to authorize spenders to use a designated amount of tokens on their behalf. However, the process of decreasing an allowance is limited to the owner's side, which can be problematic if the token owner is a treasury wallet or a multi-signature wallet that has granted an excessive allowance to a spender. In such cases, reducing the allowance from the owner's perspective can be time-consuming and challenging.

To address this issue and enhance security measures, this EIP proposes allowing spenders to decrease or revoke the granted allowance from their end. This feature provides an additional layer of security in the event of a potential hack in the future. It also eliminates the need for a consensus or complex procedures to decrease the allowance from the token owner's side.

## Specification

The keywords “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Contracts using this EIP MUST implement the `IERC7410` interface.

### Interface implementation

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

/**
 * @title IERC-7410 Update Allowance By Spender Extension
 * Note: the ERC-165 identifier for this interface is 0x2d474b5c
 */
interface IERC7410 is IERC20 {

    /**
     * @notice Updates any allowance by `owner` address for caller.
     * Emits an {IERC20-Approval} event.
     *
     * Requirements:
     * - `owner` cannot be the caller.
     * - `amount` should be less than or equal to current allowance of `owner` for caller.
     */
    function approveBySpender(address owner, uint256 amount) external;

}
```

The `approveBySpender(address owner, uint256 amount)` function MUST be either `public` or `external`.

The `Approval` event MUST be emitted when `approveBySpender` is called.

The `supportsInterface` method MUST return `true` when called with `0x2d474b5c`.

## Rationale

By having a way to approve and revoke in a manner similar to [ERC-20](./eip-20.md), the trust level can be more directly managed by spender:

- Using the `approveBySpender` function, spenders can revoke or decrease their allowance to spend an `amount`.

The [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) name patterns were used due to similarities with [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) approvals.

## Backwards Compatibility

This standard is compatible with [ERC-20](./eip-20.md).

## Reference Implementation

An minimal implementation is included [here](../assets/eip-7410/ERC7410.sol).

## Security Considerations

Users of this EIP must thoroughly consider the amount of tokens they decrease from their allowance for an `owner`.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
