---
eip: 3374
title: Predictable Proof-of-Work (POW) Sunsetting 
author: Query0x (@Query0x)
discussions-to: <tbd>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2021-03-13
---

## Simple Summary
Provides for a predictable, issuance neutral reduction of block rewards to 1 over a one year time span while reducing the uncertainties and risks associated with sudden changes to mining economics.

## Abstract
Sets the block reward to 3 ETH and then incrementally decreases it every block for 2,362,000 blocks (approximately 1 year) until it reaches 1 ETH.

## Motivation
Unnecessarily abrupt changes to the Ethereum ecosystem cause disruption and disharmony resulting in the disenfranchisement of community members while undermining stability and confidence.  While moves from Proof-of-Work to Proof-of-Stake will undoubtedly cause friction between those community members vested in either, all benefit from a measured, predictable transition.

This proposal:

1) Is issuance neutral.  There is no overall increase in mining rewards.
2) Smooths the immediate impact of [EIP-1559](./eip-1559) on mining economics reducing the likeihood of reactionary responses;
3) Introduces an ongoing, predictable reduction in future mining rewards down to 1, effectively "sunsetting" POW and codifying the move to POS;
4) Removes economic incentives for continued development of ASICs;
5) Allows the impacts of decreasing miner rewards to be measured and monitored rather than relying on conjecture and game theory, so adjustments can be made if necessary.
6) Moves us one step closer to world peace and a more harmonious Ethereum ecosystem.

## Specification
Adjust block, uncle, and nephew rewards
### Constants
* `TRANSITION_START_BLOCK_NUMBER: TBD`
* `TRANSITION_DURATION: 2_362_000` // (about one year)
* `TRANSITION_END_BLOCK_NUMBER: FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER + TRANSITION_DURATION`
* `STARTING_REWARD: 3_000_000_000_000_000_000`
* `ENDING_REWARD: 1_000_000_000_000_000_000`
* `REWARD_DELTA: STARTING_REWARD - ENDING_REWARD`
### Block Reward
```py
if block.number >= TRANSITION_END_BLOCK_NUMBER:
    block_reward = ENDING_REWARD
elif block.number >= TRANSITION_START_BLOCK_NUMBER:
    block_reward = STARTING_REWARD - REWARD_DELTA * TRANSITION_DURATION / (block.number - TRANSITION_START_BLOCK_NUMBER)
```

## Rationale
This proposal smooths the effect of EIP-1559 on mining economics, without affecting the fee burn or increasing total ETH issuance, and mitigates the risks and uncertainties that sudden changes to mining economics impart on network security.  Temporarily raising the mining reward to 3 blunts the initial impact of EIP-1559 and the continual reductions thereafter codify Ethereum's move to POS by increasingly disincentivizing POW.  Importantly, this approach moderates the rate of change so impacts and threats can be measured and monitored.

## Backwards Compatibility
There are no known backward compatibility issues with the introduction of this EIP.

## Security Considerations
There are no known security issues with the introduction of this EIP.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via CC0.
