---
eip: 4906
title: ERC-721 Metadata Update Extension
description: Add a `MetadataUpdate` event to ERC-721.
author: Anders (@0xanders), Lance (@LanceSnow), Shrug <shrug@emojidao.org>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip4906-erc-721-erc-1155-metadata-update-extension/8588
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-03-13
requires: 165, 721
---

## Abstract

This standard is an extension of [ERC-721](./eip-721.md). It proposes adding a `MetadataUpdate` event to ERC-721 tokens.

## Motivation

Many [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) contracts emit an event when one of its token's metadata is changed. While tracking changes based on these different events is possible, it is extra effort for third-party platforms, such as an NFT marketplace, to build bespoke solutions for each NFT collection.

Having a standard `MetadataUpdate` event will make it easy for third-party platforms to timely update the metadata of many NFTs.

## Specification

The keywords “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

The **metadata update extension** is OPTIONAL for ERC-721 contracts.


```solidity
/// @title ERC-721 Metadata Update Extension
interface IERC4906 is IERC165{
    /// @dev This event emits when the metadata of a token is changed.
    /// So that the third-party platforms such as NFT market could
    /// timely update the images and related attributes of the NFT
    event MetadataUpdate(uint256 _tokenId);
}
```

The `MetadataUpdate` event MUST be emitted when the JSON metadata of a token is changed.

Not emitting `MetadataUpdate` event is RECOMMENDED when a token is minted.

Not emitting `MetadataUpdate` event is RECOMMENDED  when a token is burned.

Not emitting `MetadataUpdate` event is RECOMMENDED  when the tokenURI changes but the JSON metadata does not.

The `supportsInterface` method MUST return `true` when called with `0x49064906`.

## Rationale

Different NFTs have different metadata, and metadata generally has multiple fields. `bytes data` could be used to represents the modified value of metadata.  It is difficult for third-party platforms to identify various types of `bytes data`, so there is only one parameter `uint256 indexed _tokenId` in `MetadataUpdate` event.

After capturing the `MetadataUpdate` event, a third party can update the metadata with information returned from the `tokenURI(uint256 _tokenId)` of ERC-721.

## Backwards Compatibility

No issues.

## Reference Implementation

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

import "@openzeppelin/contracts/token/ERC721/ERC721.sol";
import "./IERC4906.sol";

contract ERC4906 is ERC721, IERC4906 {

    constructor(string memory name_, string memory symbol_) ERC721(name_, symbol_){
    }

    /// @dev See {IERC165-supportsInterface}.
    function supportsInterface(bytes4 interfaceId) public view virtual override(IERC165, ERC721) returns (bool) {
        return interfaceId == bytes4(0x49064906) || super.supportsInterface(interfaceId);
    }
}
```

## Security Considerations

If there is an off-chain modification of metadata, a method that triggers `MetadataUpdate` can be added, but note the function's permission controls.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).

