---
eip: 5748
title: Approval Expiration for EIP-20 Tokens
description: Extending EIP-20 approvals to automatically expire after a duration
author: Go+ Security (@GoPlusSecurity), Eskil (@xyfidea), Jeff Hall (@Mr-Lucky), Xavi (@XaaaaavitheFool), Turan Vural (@turanzv)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-5748-automatic-token-approval-expiration/11185
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Interface
created: 2022-10-02
requires: 20
---

## Abstract

This standard adds an expiration time to the `_approve()` function of token contracts to automatically recall approvals within a certain time period. This functionality as a standard will prevent vulnerabilty exploits due to outstanding token approvals.

## Motivation

As of the writing of this standard, the approval attack is the most common attack method in the industry with nearly all phishing attacks and asset theft related to it. Although good usage habits and basic knowledge of on-chain security can help users avoid a multitiude of exploits such as phishing, scams, DNS hijacking, JS injection, and other common approval attack methods, the spender's own security (or lack thereof) still needs to be fortified by strong code.

In the Transit Swap attack of October 1st, 2022, hackers used a vulnerability in the Transit Swap contract to steal $20 million in assets. Due in part to professional security audits and the strong brand recognition of Transit Swap, many users were given a false sense of security and trusted the platform's service. Transit Swaps's contract had been running smoothly for over a year and had accumulated a large amount of user allownces, making the contract a high-reward target for malicious actors.

There have been many similar incidents to the Transit Swap attack. Security audits cannot gurantee that a contract is 100% free from vulnerabilities. Some vulnerabilities are intentionally left by malicious developers themselves. In line with good trust practices and general security hygeine, unconditional trust is risky, and modifying approvals into limited trusts with automatic recovery will be a key tool to natively prevent attacks.

## Specification

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

/// @title Approval Expiration for EIP-20 Tokens

interface IERC20ApprovalExpire {
    /**
     *  @dev Emitted when the allowance of a `spender` for an `owner` is set by a call to {approve} or {transferFrom}.
     */
    event AllowanceExpirationUpdated(address indexed _owner, address indexed _spender, uint256 _value, uint256 _expireAt);


    /**
     *  @dev returns the default expiration time for approval
     */
    function defaultExpiration() external pure returns (uint256);

    /**
     *  @dev Return the expire timestamp of the Approval which the address owner approve to the spender. _expiration[_owner][_spender]
     */
    function allowanceExpiration(address _owner, address _spender) external view returns(uint256);

    /**
     *  @dev
     *
     *  Returns a boolean value indicating whether the operation succeeded.
     *
     *  the origin ERC20 approve, increaseAllowance, decreaseAllowance functions need to use DEFAULT_EXPIRATION
     *  as the params ‘period’ when call this internal _approve function.
     *  In this function, set _expiration[owner][spender] = block.timestamp + period,
     *  and emit AllowanceExpirationUpdated event.
     *
     *  Emits an {AllowanceExpirationUpdated} event.
     *  Emits an {Approval} event.
     *
     *  In the success case
     */
    function approve(address _spender, uint256 _value, uint256 _period) external returns (bool);

    /**
     *  @dev Add the param 'period' for ERC20.increaseAllowance
     *  Default increaseAllowance is overridden if the period is specified
     */
    function increaseAllowance(address _spender, uint256 _addedValue, uint256 _period) external returns (bool);

    /**
     *  @dev Add the param 'period' for ERC20.decreaseAllowance
     *  Default decreaseAllowance is overridden if the period is specified
     */
    function decreaseAllowance(address spender, uint256 subtractedValue, uint256 period) external returns (bool);
}

```

A time period `_expiration` is mapped on top of the original `allowance` to specify an approval time limit.

The `_approve()` method adds uint256 `period` to the entry, which is stored in `_expiration`.

Contracts implementing this standard MUST expose a `DEFAULT_EXPIRATION` constant of type `uint256`. This constant stores the expiration period to use for `approve` calls that do not include a `period` argument.

`approve` functions without a `period` argument MUST use the expiry period exposed in the `DEFAULT_EXPIRATION` constant.

In order not to interfere with the existing event statistics and to allow other developers to count the validity of allowance, we add a new event `AllowanceExpireTimeUpdated()`, which will be triggered in the `_approve()` method.

A separate approval method with the header `approve(address spender, uint256 amount, uint256 period)` modifies the `_expiration` value for existing approvals.

Transactions using the `transferFrom()` method will be checked against `_expiration` through `_spendAllowance()`. Transactions that take place after the alloted time period will fail.

The `allowance()`, `increaseAllowance()`, and `decreaseAllowance()` methods have been modified to accommodate the new features. `allowanceExpiration()` has been added to query the live period of the contract.

The above modifications adds a validity period to [EIP-20](./eip-20.md) token approvals. Users can freely update their allowance validity at any time by calling `approve(address spender, uint256 amount, uint256 period)`.

## Rationale

`_expiration` is implemented as a mapping to improve the compatibility of the code.

A separate approval method with the header `approve(address spender, uint256 amount, uint256 period)` has been introduced to allow users to customize the `_expiration` value of the approval.

The internal method `_spendAllowance()` is introduced for code cleanliness with the function of checking the allowance amount and expiration.

The `allowance()` method has been modified to accommodate the functionality described in this standard. `allowanceExpiration()` has been added query the allowance expiration date.

## Backwards Compatibility

This standard is compatible with the [EIP-20](./eip-20.md), [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) and [EIP-1155](./eip-1155.md) standards. Tokens issued in the form of proxy contracts can be updated to comply with this standard.

So that existing event statistics are not perturbed by the implementation of this standard, `_approve()` is triggered by the new event `AllowanceExpireTimeUpdated()`.

This standard is absolutely compatible with the traditional [EIP-20](./eip-20.md) standard. `DEFAULT_EXPIRATION` is added so that the original `approve(address spender, uint256 amount)` method header can remain for backwards compatibility and ease of programming. `DEFAULT_EXPIRATION` can be set to a constant or variable according to the developer's needs.

## Reference Implementation

Implementation can be referenced in `../assets/eip-5748/`.

## Security Considerations

When upgrading a standard [EIP-20](./eip-20.md)-based proxy contract to this standard, attention should be paid to the location of assets.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
