---
eip: 7506
title: Trusted Hint Registry
description: Registry of trusted hints for decentralized ecosystems.
author: Philipp Bolte (@strumswell), Dennis von der Bey (@DennisVonDerBey), Lauritz Leifermann (@lleifermann)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-trusted-hint-registry/15615
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-08-31
requires: 712
---

## Abstract

This ERC proposes the "Trusted Hint Registry," a standardized on-chain metadata management interface. It addresses the
critical need for trust establishment in decentralized ecosystems, enabling entities to efficiently manage hints that
bolster claim integrity and verifiability. The addition of various management features around delegation, ownership, and
meta transactions aim to create an adaptable registry for various use cases and requirements within decentralized
ecosystems.

## Motivation

In an increasingly interconnected and decentralized landscape, the formation of trust among entities remains a critical
concern. Ecosystems, both on-chain and off-chain—spanning across businesses, social initiatives, and other organized
frameworks—frequently issue claims for or about entities within their networks. These claims serve as the foundational
elements of trust, facilitating interactions and transactions in environments that are essentially untrustworthy by
nature. While the decentralization movement has brought about significant improvements around trustless technologies,
many ecosystems building on top of these are in need of technologies that build trust in their realm. Real-world
applications have shown that verifiable claims alone are not enough for this purpose. Moreover, a supporting layer of
on-chain metadata is needed to support a reliable exchange and verification of those claims.

The absence of a structured mechanism to manage these claim metadata on-chain poses a significant hurdle to the
formation and maintenance of trust among participating entities in an ecosystem. This necessitates the introduction of a
layer of on-chain metadata, which can assist in the reliable verification and interpretation of these claims. Termed "
hints" in this specification, this metadata can be used in numerous ways, each serving to bolster the integrity and
reliability of the ecosystem's claims. Hints can perform various tasks, such as providing revocation details,
identifying trusted issuers, or offering timestamping hashes. These are just a few examples that enable ecosystems to
validate and authenticate claims, as well as verify data integrity over time.

The proposed "Trusted Hint Registry" aims to provide a robust, flexible, and standardized interface for managing such
hints. The registry allows any address to manage multiple lists of hints, with a set of features that not only make it
easier to create and manage these hints but also offer the flexibility of delegating these capabilities to trusted
entities. In practice, this turns the hint lists into dynamic tools adaptable to varying requirements and use cases.
Moreover, an interface has been designed with a keen focus on interoperability, taking into consideration existing W3C
specifications around Decentralized Identifiers and Verifiable Credentials, as well as aligning with on-chain projects
like the Ethereum Attestation Service.

By providing a standardized smart contract interface for hint management, this specification plays an integral role in
enabling and scaling trust in decentralized ecosystems. It offers a foundational layer upon which claims—both on-chain
and off-chain—can be reliably issued, verified, and interpreted, thus serving as an essential building block for the
credible operation of any decentralized ecosystem. Therefore, the Trusted Hint Registry is not just an addition to the
ecosystem but a necessary evolution in the complex topology of decentralized trust.

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and
“OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

This EIP specifies a contract called`TrustedHintRegistry`that is deployed once and may then be commonly used by a wider
audience. Governance is deliberately excluded from this ERC.

### Definitions

- `claim`: A claim is a statement about an entity made by another entity.
- `hint`: A hint is a metadata snippet that describes key attributes related to verifiable data or identities. These
  hints provide insights, aiding in the interpretation, reliability, and verifiability of decentralized ecosystem data.
- `namespace`: A namespace is a representation of an Ethereum address inside the registry that corresponds to its
  owner’s address. A namespace contains hint lists for different use cases.
- `hint list`: A hint list is identified by a unique value that contains a number of hint keys that resolve to hint
  values. An example of this is a revocation key that resolves to a revocation state.
- `hint key`: A hint key is a unique value that resolves to a hint value. An example of this is a trusted issuer
  identifier, which resolves to the trust status of that identifier.
- `hint value`: A hint value expresses data about an entity in an ecosystem.
- `delegate`: An Ethereum address that has been granted writing permissions to a hint list by its owner.

### Interface

#### Hint Management

##### getHint

A method with the following signature **MUST** be implemented that returns the hint value in a hint list of a namespace.

```solidity
function getHint(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32 _key) external view returns (bytes32);
```

##### setHint

A method with the following signature **MUST** be implemented that changes the hint value in a hint list of a namespace.

```solidity
function setHint(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32 _key, bytes32 _value) public;
```

##### setHintSigned

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that changes the hint value in a hint list of a namespace
with a raw signature. The raw signature **MUST** be generated following the Meta Transactions section.

```solidity
function setHintSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32 _key, bytes32 _value, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

##### setHints

A method with the following signature **MUST** be implemented that changes multiple hint values in a hint list of a
namespace.

```solidity
function setHints(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32[] calldata _keys, bytes32[] calldata _values) public;
```

##### setHintsSigned

A method with the following signature **MUST** be implemented that multiple hint values in a hint list of a namespace
with a raw signature. The raw signature **MUST** be generated following the Meta Transactions section.

```solidity
function setHintsSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32[] calldata _keys, bytes32[] calldata _values, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

#### Delegated Hint Management

A namespace owner can add delegate addresses to specific hint lists in their namespace. These delegates **SHALL** have
write access to the specific lists via a specific set of methods.

##### setHintDelegated

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that changes the hint value in a hint list of a namespace
for pre-approved delegates.

```solidity
function setHintDelegated(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32 _key, bytes32 _value) public;
```

##### setHintDelegatedSigned

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that changes the hint value in a hint list of a namespace
for pre-approved delegates with a raw signature. The raw signature **MUST** be generated following the Meta Transactions
section.

```solidity
function setHintDelegatedSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32 _key, bytes32 _value, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

##### setHintsDelegated

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that changes multiple hint values in a hint list of a
namespace for pre-approved delegates.

```solidity
function setHintsDelegated(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32[] calldata _keys, bytes32[] calldata _values) public;
```

##### setHintsDelegatedSigned

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that has multiple hint values in a hint list of a namespace
for pre-approved delegates with a raw signature. The raw signature **MUST** be generated following the Meta Transactions
section.

```solidity
function setHintsDelegatedSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bytes32[] calldata _keys, bytes32[] calldata _values, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

#### Hint List Management

##### setListStatus

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that changes the validity state of a hint list. This
enables one to (un)-revoke a whole list of hint values.

```solidity
function setListStatus(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bool _revoked) public;
```

##### setListStatusSigned

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that changes the validity state of a hint list with a raw
signature. This enables one to (un)-revoke a whole list of hint values.

```solidity
function setListStatusSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, bool _revoked, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

##### setListOwner

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that transfers the ownership of a trust list to another
address. Changing the owner of a list **SHALL NOT** change the namespace the hint list resides in, to retain references
of paths to a hint value.

```solidity
function setListOwner(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, address _newOwner) public;
```

##### setListOwnerSigned

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented that transfers the ownership of a trust list to another
address with a raw signature. The raw signature **MUST** be generated following the Meta Transactions section. Changing
the owner of a list **SHALL NOT** change the namespace the hint list resides in, to retain references to paths to a hint
value.

```solidity
function setListOwnerSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, address _newOwner, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

##### addListDelegate

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented to add a delegate to an owner’s hint list in a namespace.

```solidity
function addListDelegate(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, address _delegate, uint256 _untilTimestamp) public;
```

##### addListDelegateSigned

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented to add a delegate to an owner’s hint list in a namespace
with a raw signature. The raw signature **MUST** be generated following the Meta Transactions section.

```solidity
function addListDelegateSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, address _delegate, uint256 _untilTimestamp, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

##### removeListDelegate

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented to remove a delegate from an owner’s revocation hint list
in a namespace.

```solidity
function removeListDelegate(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, address _delegate) public;
```

##### removeListDelegateSigned

A method with the following signature **MAY** be implemented to remove a delegate from an owner’s revocation hint list
in a namespace with a raw signature. The raw signature **MUST** be generated following the Meta Transactions section.

```solidity
function removeListDelegateSigned(address _namespace, bytes32 _list, address _delegate, address _signer, bytes calldata _signature) public;
```

****

#### Events

##### HintValueChanged

**MUST** be emitted when a hint value has changed.

```solidity
event HintValueChanged(
  address indexed namespace,
  bytes32 indexed list,
  bytes32 indexed key,
  bytes32 value
);
```

##### HintListOwnerChanged

**MUST** be emitted when the owner of a list has changed.

```solidity
event HintListOwnerChanged(
  address indexed namespace,
  bytes32 indexed list,
  address indexed newOwner
);
```

##### HintListDelegateAdded

**MUST** be emitted when a delegate has been added to a hint list.

```solidity
event HintListDelegateAdded(
  address indexed namespace,
  bytes32 indexed list,
  address indexed newDelegate
);
```

##### HintListDelegateRemoved

**MUST** be emitted when a delegate has been removed from a hint list.

```solidity
event HintListDelegateRemoved(
  address indexed namespace,
  bytes32 indexed list,
  address indexed oldDelegate
);
```

##### HintListStatusChanged

**MUST** be emitted when the validity status of the hint list has been changed.

```solidity
event HintListStatusChanged(
  address indexed namespace,
  bytes32 indexed list,
  bool indexed revoked
);
```

### Meta Transactions

This section uses the following terms:

- **`transaction signer`**: An Ethereum address that signs arbitrary data for the contract to execute **BUT** does not
  commit the transaction.
- **`transaction sender`**: An Ethereum address that takes signed data from a **transaction signer** and commits it
  wrapped in a transaction to the smart contract.

A **transaction signer** **MAY** be able to deliver a signed payload off-band to a **transaction sender** that initiates
the Ethereum interaction with the smart contract. The signed payload **MUST** be limited to being used only
once (see Signed Hash and Nonce).

#### Signed Hash

The signature of the **transaction signer** **MUST** conform to [EIP-712](./eip-712.md). This helps users understand
what the payload they are signing consists of, and it provides protection against replay attacks.

#### Nonce

This EIP **RECOMMENDS** the use of a **dedicated nonce mapping** for meta transactions. If the signature of the *
*transaction sender** and its meta-contents are verified, the contract increases a nonce for this **transaction signer
**. This effectively removes the possibility for any other sender to execute the same transaction again with another
wallet.

### Trust Anchor via ENS

Ecosystems that use an Ethereum Name Service (ENS) domain can increase trust by using ENS entries to share information
about a hint list registry. This method takes advantage of the ENS domain's established credibility to make it easier to
find a reliable hint registry contract, as well as the appropriate namespace and hint list customized for particular
ecosystem needs. Implementing a trust anchor through ENS is optional.

For each use case, a specific ENS subdomain **SHALL** be created only used for a specific hint list, e.g.,
“trusted-issuers.ens.eth”. The following records **SHALL** be set:

- ADDRESS ETH - address of the trusted hint registry contract
- TEXT - key: “hint.namespace”; value: owner address of namespace
- TEXT - key: “hint.list”; value: bytes32 key of hint list

The following records **MAY** be set:

- ABI - ABI of trusted hint registry contract

By establishing this connection, a robust foundation for trust and discovery within an ecosystem is created.

## Rationale

Examining the method signatures reveals a deliberate architecture and data hierarchy within this ERC: A namespace
address maps to a hint list, which in turn maps to a hint key, which then reveals the hint value.

```solidity
//     namespace          hint list          hint key    hint value
mapping(address => mapping(bytes32 => mapping(bytes32 => bytes32))) hints;
```

This structure is designed to implicitly establish the initial ownership of all lists under a given namespace,
eliminating the need for subsequent claiming actions. As a result, it simplifies the process of verifying and enforcing
write permissions, thereby reducing potential attack surfaces. Additional data structures must be established and
validated for features like delegate management and ownership transfer of hint lists. These structures won't affect the
main namespace layout; rather, they serve as a secondary mechanism for permission checks.

One of the primary objectives of this ERC is to include management features, as these significantly influence the ease
of collaboration and maintainability of hint lists. These features also enable platforms to hide complexities while
offering user-friendly interfaces. Specifically, the use of meta-transactions allows users to maintain control over
their private keys while outsourcing the technical heavy lifting to platforms, which is achieved simply by signing an
[EIP-712](./eip-712.md) payload.

## Backwards Compatibility

No backward compatibility issues found.

## Security Considerations

### Meta Transactions

The signature of signed transactions could potentially be replayed on different chains or deployed versions of the
registry implementing this ERC. This security consideration is addressed by the usage
of [EIP-712](./eip-712.md)

### Rights Management

The different roles and their inherent permissions are meant to prevent changes from unauthorized entities. The hint
list owner should always be in complete control over its hint list and who has writing access to it.

### Governance

It is recognized that ecosystems might have processes in place that might also apply to changes in hint lists. This ERC
explicitly leaves room for implementers or users of the registry to apply a process that fits the requirements of their
ecosystem. Possible solutions can be an extension of the contract with governance features around specific methods, the
usage of multi-sig wallets, or off-chain processes enforced by an entity.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
