---
eip: 2751
title: Disable SELFDESTRUCT
author: Alexey Akhunov (@AlexeyAkhunov)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-for-disabling-selfdestruct-opcode/4382
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2020-06-25
---

Disable SELFDESTRUCT

## Simple Summary
Make `SELFDESTRUCT` EVM operation no-op (effectively disable). Contracts will not be able to delete themselves.

## Abstract
Although `SELFDESTRUCT` originally came with EVM to help clean up the state, we learnt that in practice it did not achieve this objective on
sufficient scale, and is on balance a burden of extra complexity and unintended effects (GasToken2 and polymorphic contracts).

## Motivation
Operation `SELFDESTRUCT` (formerly `SUICIDE`) was in the EVM from the beginning, and its purpose was to incentivise clearing the state, by giving the
caller gas refund. In practice, this incentivisation turned out to be very limited, and the designed purpose was not archieved. However, `SELFDESTRUCT`
brings significant amount of complexity to the EVM. It is responsible for some of the most arcane edge cases in the EVM semantics.
It is also used as a vehicle to run an efficient arbitrage of gas prices (GasToken2), which
ironically lead to the increase use of the state. Introduction of `CREATE2` opcode in Constantinople upgrade created a new phenomenon of
polymorthic contracts, i.e. contracts that can change their bytecode over time, while residing on the same address. Polymorphic contracts are limited
in their use, because changing the bytecode via `SELFDESTRUCT` + `CREATE2` clears all the contract storage, making contract lose all its data,
and making it unsuitable to replace Proxy Pattern as a technique for upgradable contracts. Removing the effect of `SELFDESTRUCT`
will reduce complexity of EVM going forward, disable GasToken2 (but not GasToken1, which is based on storage clearing refunds), and make
polymorthic contracts impossible.

## Specification
After certain block number, the semantics of `SELFDESTRUCT` becomes the same as the combination of `POP`, followed by transferring remaining ETH
to the address popped from the stack, followed by `STOP`. Gas cost is the same as the gas cost of non-zero value transfer, which is 9000 gas. No gas refund is given.

## Rationale
Disabling `SELFDESTRUCT` is the simplest and most effective way to remove its negative effects.

## Backwards Compatibility
Backwards incompatible and requires a hard fork.

## Test Cases
There are a lot of test in the standards suite related to `SELFDESTRUCT` and its edge cases. These need to be modified for the new no-op semantics.

## Implementation
Implementation is likely to be trivial - introducing the eip flag and replacing the old, complex semantics, with the new, simple semantics.

## Security Considerations
At this point, author of this EIP is not aware of any class of smart contracts that rely on `SELFDESTRUCT` for their functionality and security, with the exception of
GasToken2 contract and similar.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
