---
eip: 3978
title: Gas refunds on reverts
author: Anton Bukov (@k06a), Mikhail Melnik (@ZumZoom)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-3978-gas-refunds-on-reverts/7071/2
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2021-09-16
---

## Simple Summary
Do not zeroify gas refunds of transaction subcall reverts, due users pay a lot of gas for storage non-modification.
    
## Abstract
>A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed. This should be a very terse and human-readable version of the specification section. Someone should be able to read only the abstract to get the gist of what this specification does.

Since [EIP-3298](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3298) gas refunds works for storage restores only inside the same transaction. For example ERC20 `approve` + `transferFrom` flow between 2 smart contracts according to [EIP-2200](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2200) and [EIP-2929](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2929) will cost nearly to `21600` gas with gas refund counter `20000`. But in case of reverting this subcall (containing both `approve` and `transferForm`) gas refund will be erased, while smart contract storage will remain unmodified. I think it should keep storage access costs, but still refund modification costs.


## Motivation
>The motivation section should describe the "why" of this EIP. What problem does it solve? Why should someone want to implement this standard? What benefit does it provide to the Ethereum ecosystem? What use cases does this EIP address?

I find current full cancel of gas refunds because of internal reved too unfair. Users pay for non-modification same cost as for modification.


## Specification
>The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Ethereum platforms (go-ethereum, parity, cpp-ethereum, ethereumj, ethereumjs, and [others](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Clients)).

Let's count all SSTORE gas costs within every subcall, excluding access costs. And on reverting any subcall let's not erase refund counter, but:
```
tx.gas_refund_counter = tx.gas_refund_counter - call.gas_refund_counter + MIN(call.gas_refund_counter, call.all_sstores_gas_cost)
```

## Rationale
>The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

## Backwards Compatibility
>All EIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The EIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. EIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.

## Test Cases
>Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for EIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other EIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.

## Reference Implementation
>An optional section that contains a reference/example implementation that people can use to assist in understanding or implementing this specification.  If the implementation is too large to reasonably be included inline, then consider adding it as one or more files in `../assets/eip-####/`.

## Security Considerations
>All EIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. EIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. An EIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

