---
eip: 7329
title: ERC/EIP Repository split
description: Split the ERC specifications out of the EIP repository into a new repository, so that only core protocol EIPs remain
author: Lightclient (@lightclient), Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/proposal-forking-ercs-from-eips-repository/12804
status: Final
type: Meta
created: 2023-07-13
requires: 1
---

## Abstract

Describes the motivation and rational for splitting the EIP repositories into an
EIP repository, targeting core ethereum changes and an ERC repository, targeting
application layer specifications.

## Motivation

Long ago when the EIPs repository was created, there was a vision of a single
home for all standards related to Ethereum. The community was small and most
people were interacting at every level of the ecosystem. It made sense to
combine application standards with core consensus changes.

Since then, the ecosystem has grown. Today, the chasm between application
development and core development is wide. Fewer people are involved across the
ecosystem (for better or worse); yet the repository remains unified.

For years, we've considered separating the repository. This would allow ERC and
EIP specifications to evolve more naturally due to the independence. But it's
always difficult to reach critical threshold to make a change like this happen.
Each time we get lost in the details of the migration and the debate grinds
progress to a halt.

Now that the Consensus Layer is also utilizing the EIP process, the cracks are
becoming more visible. There are changes we could make to the process that might
benefit them more, but because we also need to ensure the quality of ERCs, we
are restricted.

There are also many more efforts to catalyze applications around the ERC
process. Attempts have been made to develop working groups and review groups for
certain ERC "categories" (a distinction that doesn't even technically exist
because of the unified repo).

## Specification

This specification only details with the initial mechanism of the split. The
particulars of how each repository will govern itself is out of scope for this
EIP, as it is the motivating point of this EIP that the divergent needs of the
community will require highly divergent methods.

1. All ERCs and Interface-category EIPs are removed from this repository and
   migrated to a new repo. The history should be intact so that repo should be
   forked of this one with the non-ERCs removed. 
2. The new ERCs repository goes live and includes the changes from the script.
3. Setup ercs.ethereum.org subdomain and update the CI to point to the ERCs
   repo.
4. Set up a redirect for ERCs on eips.ethereum.org to go to the new website.
5. Create a unified document for editors to assign EIP/ERC numbers. EIPs and
   ERCs will no longer be based on an initial PR number but on a number
   incremented by the EIP editors of their respective repositories. EIPs will be
   assigned even numbers and ERCs will be assigned odd numbers. The exact timing
   of this migration is a policy decision of the editors.

The EIP repository will be associated with core protocol changes, specifically
the kind that would be discussed in one of the AllCoreDevs calls; whereas the
ERC repository will be affiliated with all remaining areas such as smart
contract application interfaces, wallet standards, DeFi protocol standards, and
all other such improvements that do not require core protocol changes.

This association is to persist across any other process changes the EIP editors
may introduce such as working groups, topic groups, expert groups, special
interest groups, splitting of the process, or other such changes. Any
sub-groupings that includes core protocol changes would be associated with the
EIP repository and other sub-groupings are associated with the ERC repository.
Any such process change are out of scope of this EIP and are independent of the
structural changes to the repositories specified in this EIP.

There may be further structural changes to repository layouts to accommodate
more sub-groupings. Such proposals are out of scope of this EIP.

## Rationale

There are two major communities served by the EIP process that are highly
divergent and very differentiated in their needs.

Let's consider the impact of specification ambiguity, the impacts are different
based on the community. The core protocol community has a low tolerance for
difference of implementation and a high penalty for specification ambiguity. An
improperly implemented part of a new spec could cause the ethereum mainnet to
split, possibly costing millions to billions of value lost to node operators as
well as community members using the services offered by the Ethereum protocols.
A poorly specified solidity interface, however, can be adapted and implemented
in multiple compatible ways across any smart choosing to implement it. A missing
RPC API (such as a configuration option specifying the number of decimals in the
chains native currency) can have limited to zero impact on the rest of the
community not choosing to use that wallet.

Timeframe for delivery of a feature is also similarly differentiated. A Core
protocol EIP adjusting the gas cost for transaction data needs to be rolled out
at a specific time uniformly across the network. Whereas a new RPC to support
new semantics to gas estimation would not need uniform rollout across the
Ethereum clients, and in fact would also need to be rolled out by service
provides that provide RPC services for Ethereum networks. Wallets can use early
support as a differentiating factor in their appeal to community members.

To address this divergence the AllCoreDevs call has adopted a lifecycle for EIPs
different from the Draft -> Review -> Last Call -> Final lifecycle of the EIP
repository. It would best be described as Draft -> Eligible for Inclusion ->
Considered for Inclusion -> Testnet -> Mainnet. The EIPs also get slotted for a
fork in the third step, a consideration that simply does not apply to a smart
contract or wallet standard.

Several alternatives have been proposed, but the actual implementation only
further underscores the specialization that each side of the split encounters.

### Alternative: Working Groups

One repeated concern of editors is that they often lack the technical experience
to adequately judge if an EIP is complete and sound. Considering that EIPs
covers wide variety of topics such as elliptic curve cryptography, VM
performance, DeFi market dynamics, compression protocols, NFT Royalties, and
consensus protocols it is impossible for a single editor to provide sensible
feedback on every one of those topics.

When examining how the core protocol and ERC communities would approach the
working group process, however, it underscores how different they would handle
it. For core protocol change the working group would be one of the two
AllCoreDevs meetings, either AllCoreDevs-Execution or AllCoreDevs-Consensus. And
sometimes both. There is no EIP that would be shipped in mainnet that would not
first be extensively considered by one of these two groups.

ERC proposals have no such standing groups. Wallet impacting changes may go
through the AllWalletDevs group, but it is entirely possible for a wallet or
group of wallets to collaborate on a protocol outside AllWalletDevs. Smart
contract APIs have no such standing meeting.

The Working Group model, however, would be a critical social signal for the ERC
community. It would signal a critical mass for a particular proposal issue if
enough experts could get together to agree to review a set of changes.

While working groups are excellent for the ERC community, it is overhead for the
core protocol community that would only add friction to an already established
process with know governance checkpoints.

### Alternative: Specialized Editors

This alternative has already been implemented with the introduction of the
`eip-editors.yml` file. This allows for different groups of editors to review
different types of EIPs.

There has been no measurable impact on the divergence of the community. Most
categories have a significant overlap with other categories.

This alternative does not address the governance and workflow issues that the
Core Protocol Developers would want to implement. All subgroups would still be
subject to the same workflow as other groups.

### Alternative: Pain unrelated to process divergences

This is a catch-all for a number of proposals, from allowing discord links in
discussion-to to allowing more freedom in external links.

While the theory that this may reduce the total amount of pain felt by users and
editors, bringing the pain level down to a more acceptable level, this does not
address the core divergence issue. Many of these pain relief proposals should
probably be done anyway, weather or not the EIP repository splits.

### Alternative: Replace EIP Editors with AI Chatbots

Nobody wins in this proposal. We would instead end up debating training sets,
competing implementations, and whether to use commercial providers. And
that's if things go well.

AI chatbots, however, would not be able to compartmentalize the divergent needs
of the multiple groups if all adjudication were to be handled with one model or
one chat session. Higher quality output would be received if separate training
repositories were used for each major functional area.

### Alternatives are not Mutually Exclusive

It is critical to note that most of the discussed alternatives all have merits
and address important pain points. The adoption of a split should not be viewed
as a rejection of those alternatives. To quote a famous internet meme "Why Not
Both?"

### Objection: This splits the ethereum community

One objection is that splitting the repository would result in the community no
longer being able to say "we are all of us Ethereum Magicians."

First it is important to note that such splits are already occurring. The
AllCoreDevs call has split into a Consensus and Execution layer call. ACD calls
no longer discuss client issues like wallet apis, the AllWalletDevs call has
adopted those issues and has grown into user experience issues. Cross chain
issues have been adopted by the Chain Agnostic Improvement Process (CAIP) group.

Rather than splitting this should be viewed as "sharding", where a sub-community
of interest rallies around a shared sub issue, and by gathering are able to
increase the total scope of the community. CAIP is a perfect example where
operating separate from EIPs have allowed them to strengthen the ethereum
community.

Is a single cell organism weakened when it grows large and then splits into two?
Is an animal weakened when cells split and specialize into different tasks? It
is this very act of division and specialization that allows it to accomplish the
things that would be impossible as a single uniform cell.

### Objection: This should be an  [EIP-1](./eip-1.md) proposal

Since this is directly impacting the ERC process it should be documented
in  [EIP-1](./eip-1.md) first.

As the old programming adage goes: "Refactor first before adding any new
features."  Adding new processes specific to the post-split governing docs would
only confuse the existing process, adding special cases for one class of EIPs
that don't apply to another. It is precisely this kind of problem the proposed
split is aiming to change.

This is also valid grounds for a Meta category EIP, as how many and which
repository to put a proposal in is core to the "procedures, guidelines, \[and\]
changes to the decision-making process".

Some process changes that can be expected in a Core Protocol EIP may include:

* Changing the work flow to add the Eligible for Inclusion/Considered for
  Inclusion stages to a pre-last-call EIP.
* Adding test net and mainnet steps to the lifecycle
* Adding a "fork" header to the RFCs section, for EIPs that are (or will be)
  implemented in a specific fork
* Changing the testing section to a header link to reference tests

Some process change ERC may want to adopt:

* A strong working group model and adding an optional "forming working group"
  step editors may require.
* Add an "outdated" or "replaced" lifecycle step for EIPs that are abrogated by
  future specs.
* Deputize single-eip reviewers for specific EIPs

### Objection: Structural changes to a repository and process changes do not need to be bundled.

It is possible to split the structure of the repositories separately from any
EIP process changes related to this. Bundling the changes is unnecessary and
such structure and process changes should be handled independently.

To accommodate this objection this EIP has been revised to only address
structural changes in the repository and can be adapted to any other,
independent, process changes and mapped onto those outcomes.

## Backwards Compatibility

### Old Links

Old ERC links pointing to the old url `https://eips.ethereum.org/` will continue
to work. Redirect instructions will be put into place to redirect to the new ERC
repos for their corresponding location.

### Stray Proposals

ERC community members may continue to post new ERCs in the EIP proposal. Editors
will be able to redirect them to the new repository. ERCs that do not respond to
editor requests would not be merged anyway.

## Security Considerations

This proposal only addresses the EIP and ERC proposal process and is not
expected to expose any new attack surfaces by virtue of its adoption.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
