---
eip: 6969
title: Submit Block RPC
author: Zachary Belford (@belfordz)
discussions-to: https://github.com/etclabscore/ECIPs/issues/32
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Interface
created: 2019-06-26
requires: 1474
---

## Simple Summary
Add an RPC method to submit a new block, instead of having to use submitWork.

## Abstract
At the moment, there is no high level facility through which an external-to-geth system can submit a newly mined block. Mining pools rely on submitWork, which implies that the provider of the submitted work is not able to, at the time of submission, provide an address to receive the payout.

By adding a JSON-RPC method that accepts a fully formed new block to submit instead of having to use `submitWork`, we will drastically simplify the process and software required to build a highly scalable mining pool.

## Motivation
I would like to be able to submitWork, but have the address used be one other than the etherbase of the node the work is being submitted by.

## Specification
The submit block method should accept a block as its parameter.

The submitted block is validated and added to the blockchain.

If the block is has been accepted into the chain, the result will be `true` and `false` otherwise.

Below is the method specified using [OpenRPC](https://spec.open-rpc.org) spec.

```json
{
  "openrpc": "1.1.8",
  "info": {
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "title": "Example submitBlock"
  },
  "methods": [
    {
      "name": "eth_submitBlock",
      "summary": "Submit a new block proposal",
      "description": "Given a new block, it will validate the block, and broadcast it to connected peers.",
      "params": [
        { "$ref": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/etclabscore/ethereum-json-rpc-specification/master/openrpc.json#/components/contentDescriptors/Block" }
      ],
      "result": {
        "name": "isBlockAccepted",
        "schema": {
          "type": "boolean"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## Rationale
This removes the dependency for miners to have a geth node with accounts that need to be unlocked. Miners would be able to better isolate their private keys from the world, yielding better security potential.

## Backwards Compatibility
No issues with backwards compatibility as its a new method, not a change of existing methods.

## Test Cases
```bash
curl -XPOST localhost:8485 -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"jsonrpc": "2.0","id": 1, "method": "eth_submitBlock", "params": {"number": "0x1", "hash": "... }}'
```

Should return something of the shape:

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "result": true
}
```

## Implementation
I think it's pretty straight forward. Looking at the above specification, we would be adding an `eth_submitBlock` RPC method. It's similar to `eth_submitWork`, except with fewer steps before broadcasting the block.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
