---
eip: 2520
title: Multiple contenthash records for ENS
author: Filip Štamcar (@filips123)
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/2393
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2020-02-18
requires: 1577
---

## Simple Summary
ENS support for multiple `contenthash` records on a single ENS name.

## Motivation
Many applications are resolving ENS names to content hosted on distributed systems. To do this, they use `contenthash` record from ENS domain to know how to resolve names and which distributed system should be used.

However, the domain can store only one `contenthash` record which means that the site owner needs to decide which hosting system to use. Because there are many ENS-compatible hosting systems available (IPFS, Swarm, recently Onion and ZeroNet), and there will probably be even more in the future, lack of support for multiple records could become problematic. Instead, domains should be able to store multiple `contenthash` records to allow applications to resolve to multiple hosting systems.

## Specification
A resolver SHOULD store `contenthash` records in `mapping`, containing `protoCode` as key and whole `contenthash` (including `protoCode`) as value. Default `contenthash` SHOULD be stored as empty `bytes` key. Alternatively, it MAY use other storage types, but public interface MUST be the same as described in this EIP.

Setting and getting functions MUST have the same public interface as specified in EIP 1577. Additionally, they MUST also have new public interfaces introduced by this EIP:

* For setting a `contenthash` record, the `setContenthash` MUST provide additional `proto` parameter and use it to save the `contenthash`. When `proto` is not provided, it MUST save the record as default record.

  ```solidity
  function setContenthash(bytes32 node, bytes calldata proto, bytes calldata hash) external authorised(node);
  ```

* For getting a `contenthash` record, the `contenthash` MUST provide additional `proto` parameter and use it to get the `contenthash` for requested type. When `proto` is not provided, it MUST return the default record.

  ```solidity
  function contenthash(bytes32 node, bytes calldata proto) external view returns (bytes memory);
  ```

* Resolver that supports multiple `contenthash` records MUST return `true` for `supportsInterface` with interface ID `0x6de03e07`.

Applications that are using ENS `contenthash` records SHOULD handle them in a specific way:

* If the application only supports one hosting system (like directly handling ENS from IPFS/Swarm gateways), it SHOULD request `contenthash` with a specific type. The contract MUST then return it and application SHOULD correctly handle it.

* If the application supports multiple hosting systems (like MetaMask), it SHOULD request `contenthash` without a specific type (like in EIP 1577). The contract MUST then return the default `contenthash` record.

## Rationale
The proposed implementation was chosen because it is simple to implement and supports all important requested features. However, it doesn't support multiple records for the same type and priority order, as they aren't so important and are harder to implement properly. To implement them, a different way of implementation would need to be used.

## Backwards Compatibility
The EIP is backwards-compatible with EIP 1577, the only difference is additional overloaded methods. Old applications will still be able to function correctly, as they will receive the default `contenthash` record.

## Test Cases
Automatic Truffle tests have also been written along with new contract code. However, additional manual tests are also needed.

## Implementation
Implementation of the smart contract, as well as automatic tests, are written in [`ensdomains/resolvers#30`](https://github.com/ensdomains/resolvers/pull/30).

## Security Considerations
There SHOULD NOT be any security problems with this EIP. However, it SHOULD still be audited to check for any possible issues with using `mapping` and `bytes` for storage, and overloading methods, as well as other implementation-related features.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
