---
eip: 4883
title: ERC721 Composable SVG
description: ERC721 onchain SVG that can be composed of other ERC721 onchain SVGs
author: Andrew B Coathup (@abcoathup), Alex (@AlexPartyPanda)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-03-08
requires: 721
---

## Abstract
ERC721 onchain SVG that can be composed of other ERC721 onchain SVGs by renderering the SVG of related NFTs and concatenating

## Motivation
Composability allows onchain SVG NFTs to be crafted. e.g. adding hats to a profile pic NFT

## Specification
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Ethereum platforms (go-ethereum, parity, cpp-ethereum, ethereumj, ethereumjs, and [others](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Clients)).

## Rationale
The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

## Backwards Compatibility
All EIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The EIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. EIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.

## Test Cases
Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for EIPs that are affecting consensus changes.  If the test suite is too large to reasonably be included inline, then consider adding it as one or more files in `../assets/eip-####/`.

## Reference Implementation
```solidity
interface IERC4888 is IERC165 {
    function zIndex() external view returns (int256);

    function render(uint256 tokenId) external view returns (string memory);
}
```

## Security Considerations
All EIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. EIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. An EIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
