---
eip: 8068
title: Neutral effective balance design
description: Make the effective balance calculation neutral so that 0x01 and 0x02 validators receive the same yield, thus facilitating consolidation.
author: Anders Elowsson (@anderselowsson)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-8068-neutral-effective-balance-design/26015
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2025-10-28
requires: 7251
---

## Abstract

This EIP proposes a neutral effective balance (EB) design to ensure `0x01` (skimming) and `0x02` (compounding) validators receive equal yields. Currently, validators that compound their balance have poor capital efficiency and lower yields as their idle balance (not contributing to EB) is 0.75 ETH, significantly higher than that of skimming validators at near-zero. This disincentivizes stake consolidation critical to Ethereum's fast finality roadmap. Additionally, the current hysteresis rules allow `0x02` validators to game the hysteresis by keeping their balance below the EB. The increased profitability at lower balances could further harm consolidation. This proposal sets the EB hysteresis upward threshold to the neutral +0.5 and the downward threshold to +0.25. To prevent gaming after operations like partial withdrawals, the EB is reset to the floor of the balance, and a one-time `temporary_upward_threshold` set. This threshold is derived from an integral equation that ensures the average idle balance is zero as the validator's balance compounds up to the next integer.

## Motivation

The roadmap for fast finality hinges on stake consolidation, where staking service providers (SSPs) transition from running 32-ETH validators with `0x01` credentials to compounding validators with `0x02` credentials. A roadblock to this transition is that `0x01` validators have close-to-ideal capital efficiency, whereas `0x02` validators have poor capital efficiency during compounding. Furthermore, the optimal configuration for a `0x02` validator is to reduce its balance to 32.75 ETH and prevent it from compounding further. These incentives may lead Ethereum's fast-finality roadmap to be delayed. To prevent this, a neutral effective balance calculation is proposed, that sees all validator configurations earn the same CL yield.

A `0x02` validator that compounds its balance $b$ as intended will on average have 0.75 ETH of its balance not counting toward its effective balance (EB, or $E$ in equations). Specifically, with the current EB step bands, the idle remainder $r=b-E \in[0.25, 1.25)$ and $\bar{r}=(0.25+1.25)/2=0.75$. A `0x01` validator operating at 32 ETH has a much lower idle remainder, on average half the withdrawal sweep of $0.0235/2 = 0.01175$ ETH. A 32-ETH `0x01` validator will therefore earn around 2.3% more CL yield than a compounding `0x02` validator that grows from 32.25 ETH to 34.25 ETH over around two years.

A separate issue is that `0x02` validators can make a partial withdrawal down to 32.75 ETH when having any EB >33 ETH, leveraging the hysteresis to retain a 33 ETH EB. The surplus capital can then be deployed to increase the staking yield, running multiple 32.75-ETH validators. Assuming a 3% CL yield, recurring partial withdrawals deployed at 33 ETH to bring down the balance to 32.75 ETH, and ignoring the exit queue capital drag, the approach is more profitable than running skimming 2048-ETH validators under current base fees.

To uphold fairness while not disrupting the current operation of `0x01` validators, the following changes are made:

* The upward EB step from $E$ to $E+1$ is imposed at $E + 0.5$. During regular upward compounding, the EB is thus set as the balance rounded to the nearest integer. This leads a compounding `0x02` validator to on average have a $E=b$, just like a 32-ETH `0x01` validator.
* The downward step to $E$ is imposed at $E+0.25$ ($E_{+1}-0.75$).
* User operations relevant to the EB calculation (UBOs): {entry, partial withdrawal, consolidation, switching credentials from `0x01` to `0x02`} are prevented from gaming the protocol. The EB calculation is designed such that each UBO is treated neutrally: $E=b$. To achieve this, the following takes place after every UBO at epoch boundaries:
    * The EB is initiated to the integer floor of the balance: $E = \text{EB}(b_0) = \lfloor b_0 \rfloor$.
    * A new field `temporary_upward_threshold` ($t$) is added to the Validator Container.
    * This threshold is computed as $t = E + \frac{1+(b_0-E)^2}{2}$, derived from the integral equation that stipulates that the validator will on average have $E=b$ when it smoothly grows its balance up until the next integer (see the Rationale).
    * To increase the EB, the balance must satisfy both the regular upward threshold *and* the `temporary_upward_threshold`, after which `temporary_upward_threshold` is reset to `0`.

## Specification

### Parameters

Change two existing constants: 

| Constant | Value 
| - | - |
| `HYSTERESIS_DOWNWARD_MULTIPLIER` | `3` |
| `HYSTERESIS_UPWARD_MULTIPLIER`   | `2` |

### Containers

Two new fields are added to the Validator Container:

```python
class Validator(Container):
    ...
    temporary_upward_threshold: Gwei # Initiate to 0
    reset_eb: boolean    # Initiate to False
```

### Functions

A new helper is added for initiating EB and `temporary_upward_threshold` after each UBO at epoch boundaries:

```python
def initiate_effective_balance_and_threshold(v: Validator, balance: Gwei) -> None:
    v.effective_balance = min(balance - balance % EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_INCREMENT, get_max_effective_balance(v))
    offset = (EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_INCREMENT + (balance - v.effective_balance)**2 // EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_INCREMENT) // 2
    v.temporary_upward_threshold = v.effective_balance + offset
    v.reset_eb = False
```

The new helper is called before updating the EB, and the EB update accounts for the `temporary_upward_threshold`:

```python
def process_effective_balance_updates(state: BeaconState) -> None:
    ...
    # After computing the UPWARD_THRESHOLD
    if validator.reset_eb:
        initiate_effective_balance_and_threshold(validator, balance)
        continue
    # Then, adjust the existing if-clause to account for the temporary_upward_threshold
    max_effective_balance = get_max_effective_balance(validator) 
    balance_floor = balance - balance % EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_INCREMENT
    if balance + DOWNWARD_THRESHOLD < validator.effective_balance:
        validator.effective_balance = min(balance_floor, max_effective_balance)
        validator.temporary_upward_threshold = 0
    elif (validator.effective_balance + UPWARD_THRESHOLD < balance 
        and balance >= validator.temporary_upward_threshold):
        new_eb = balance_floor
        if balance - balance_floor >= EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_INCREMENT // 2:
            new_eb = balance_floor + EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_INCREMENT
        validator.effective_balance = min(new_eb, max_effective_balance)
        validator.temporary_upward_threshold = 0
```

After each UBO, set `reset_eb = True` at the point specified in the below table:

| Type                  | Function name                     | After the following operation    | `_.reset_eb = True` |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------|
| Creation              | `get_validator_from_deposit`      | constructing the `Validator`     | validator         |
| Partial withdrawals   | `process_withdrawals`             | meeting the new if-clause        | validator         |
| Switch to compounding | `switch_to_compounding_validator` | `queue_excess_active_balance`    | validator         |
| Consolidation         | `process_pending_consolidations`  | crediting the target validator   | target_validator  |

The new if-clause in `process_withdrawals()` is:

```python
    # After this existing line
    decrease_balance(state, withdrawal.validator_index, withdrawal.amount)
    # Add a new if-clause
    v = state.validators[withdrawal.validator_index]
    if v.exit_epoch == FAR_FUTURE_EPOCH and has_compounding_withdrawal_credential(v):
        v.reset_eb = True
```

## Rationale

### Equation for the temporary upward threshold

To prevent gaming after a UBO, the EB is first reset to $E = \lfloor b_0 \rfloor$, where $b_0$ is the new balance. This creates an initial idle remainder $r_0 = b_0 - E$.

A `temporary_upward_threshold` ($t$) is then set to ensure the *average* idle balance is zero as the validator's balance compounds from $b_0$ to the next integer, $E+1$.

This threshold $t$ is calculated to solve the "zero-area" problem: the positive idle balance accumulated while $\text{EB}=E$ (from $b_0$ to $t$) must exactly cancel the negative idle balance accumulated while $\text{EB}=E+1$ (from $t$ to $E+1$). This is expressed by the integral equation:

$\int_{b_0}^{t}(b-E) db + \int_{t}^{E+1}(b-(E+1)) db = 0.$

Solving for $t$ yields the formula used in the specification:

$t = E + \frac{1+r_0^2}{2},$

where $r_0 = b_0 - E$.

## Security Considerations

To the best of the authors' knowledge, there are no security risks associated with the proposal.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
