---
eip: 7535
title: Native Asset ERC-4626 Tokenized Vault
description: ERC-4626 Tokenized Vaults with Ether (Native Asset) as the underlying asset
author: Joey Santoro (@joeysantoro)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7535-eth-native-asset-tokenized-vault/16068
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-10-12
requires: 20, 4626, 7528
---

## Abstract

This standard is an extension of the [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md) spec with an identical interface and behavioral overrides for handling Ether or any native asset as the underlying.

## Motivation

A standard for tokenized ETH Vaults has the same benefits as [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md), particularly in the case of Liquid Staking Tokens, (i.e. fungible [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) wrappers around ETH staking). 

Maintaining the same exact interface as ERC-4626 further amplifies the benefits as the standard will be maximally compatible with existing ERC-4626 tooling and protocols.

## Specification

All [ERC-7535](./eip-7535.md) tokenized Vaults MUST implement ERC-4626 (and by extension ERC-20) with behavioral overrides for the methods `asset`, `deposit`, and `mint` specified below.

### ERC-4626 Breaking Changes

* Any `assets` quantity refers to wei of Ether rather than ERC-20 balances.
* Any ERC-20 `transfer` calls are replaced by Ether transfer (`send` or `call`)
* Any ERC-20 `transferFrom` approval flows for `asset` are not implemented
* `deposit` and `mint` have state mutability `payable`
* `deposit` uses `msg.value` as the primary input and MAY ignore `assets`

### Methods

#### asset

MUST return `0xEeeeeEeeeEeEeeEeEeEeeEEEeeeeEeeeeeeeEEeE` per [ERC-7528](./eip-7528.md).

```yaml
- name: asset
  type: function
  stateMutability: view

  inputs: []

  outputs:
    - name: assetTokenAddress
      type: address
```

#### deposit

Mints `shares` Vault shares to `receiver` by depositing exactly `msg.value` of Ether.

MUST have state mutability of `payable`.

MUST use `msg.value` as the primary input parameter for calculating the `shares` output. MAY ignore `assets` parameter as an input.

MUST emit the `Deposit` event.

MUST revert if all of `msg.value` cannot be deposited (due to deposit limit being reached, slippage, etc).

```yaml
- name: deposit
  type: function
  stateMutability: payable

  inputs:
    - name: assets
      type: uint256
    - name: receiver
      type: address

  outputs:
    - name: shares
      type: uint256
```

#### mint

Mints exactly `shares` Vault shares to `receiver` by depositing `assets` of ETH.

MUST have state mutability of `payable`.

MUST emit the `Deposit` event.

MUST revert if all of `shares` cannot be minted (due to deposit limit being reached, slippage, the user not sending a large enough `msg.value` of Ether to the Vault contract, etc).

```yaml
- name: mint
  type: function
  stateMutability: payable

  inputs:
    - name: shares
      type: uint256
    - name: receiver
      type: address

  outputs:
    - name: assets
      type: uint256
```


### Events

The event usage MUST be identical to ERC-4626.

### Wrapped ETH

Any ERC-4626 Vault that uses a Wrapped ETH ERC-20 as the `asset` MUST NOT implement ERC-7535. ERC-7535 only applies to native ETH.

## Rationale

This standard was designed to maximize compatibility with ERC-4626 while minimizing additional opinionated details on the interface. Examples of this decision rationale are described below:

* maintaining the redundant `assets` input to the `deposit` function while making its usage optional
* not enforcing a relationship between `msg.value` and `assets` in a `mint` call
* not enforcing any behaviors or lack thereof for `fallback`/`__default__` methods, payability on additional vault functions, or handling ETH forcibly sent to the contract

All breaking implementation level changes with ERC-4626 are purely to accomodate for the usage of Ether or any native asset instead of an ERC-20 token.

## Backwards Compatibility

ERC-7535 is fully backward compatible with ERC-4626 at the function interface level. Certain implementation behaviors are different due to the fact that ETH is not ERC-20 compliant, such as the priority of `msg.value` over `assets`.

It has no known compatibility issues with other standards.

## Reference Implementation

TODO / WIP

## Security Considerations

In addition to all security considerations of [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md), there are security implications of having ETH as the Vault asset.

### `call` vs `send`

Contracts should take care when using `call` to transfer ETH, as this allows additional reentrancy vulnerabilities and arbitrary code execution beyond what is possible with trusted ERC-20 tokens.

It is safer to simply `send` ETH with a small gas stipend. 

Implementers should take extra precautions when deciding how to transfer ETH.

### Forceful ETH transfers

ETH can be forced into any Vault through the `SELFDESTRUCT` opcode. Implementers should validate that this does not disrupt Vault accounting in any way.

Similarly, any additional `payable` methods should be checked to ensure they do not disrupt Vault accounting.

### Wrapped ETH

Smart contract systems which implement ERC-4626 should consider only supporting ERC-20 underlying assets, and default to using a Wrapped ETH ERC-20 instead of implementing ERC-7535 for handling ETH.

The subtle differences between ERC-4626 and ERC-7535 can introduce code fragmentation and security concerns.

Cleaner use cases for ERC-7535 are ETH exclusive, such as Wrapped ETH and Liquid Staking Tokens.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
