---
eip: 7623
title: Increase calldata cost
description: Increase calldata cost to decrease the maximum block size
author: Toni Wahrstätter (@nerolation), Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7623-increase-calldata-cost/18647
status: Review
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-02-13
---



## Abstract

The current calldata pricing allows for significantly large blocks of up to 2.8 MB while the average block size is much smaller at 125 KB. 
This EIP proposes an adjustment in the Ethereum calldata cost to reduce the maximum possible block size and its variance without impacting regular users. 
This is achieved by increasing the calldata cost for transactions primarily using Ethereum for data availability.


## Motivation

The block gas limit has not been increased since [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md), while the average size of blocks has continuously increased due to the growing number of rollups posting data to Ethereum. Furthermore, the cost for calldata hasn't been adjusted since [EIP-2028](./eip-2028).
[EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) introduces blobs as a preferred method for data availability (DA). 
This transition demands a reevaluation of calldata pricing, especially with regards to mitigating the inefficiency between the average block size and the maximum one possible.
By introducing a floor cost dependent on calldata for transactions that are mainly using Ethereum for DA, this proposal aims to reduce the maximum block size to make room for adding more blobs. 


## Specification

| Parameter | Value |
| - | - |
| `STANDARD_TOKEN_COST`    |  `4` |
| `TOTAL_COST_FLOOR_PER_TOKEN`    |  `10` |


Let `tokens_in_calldata = zero_bytes_in_calldata + nonzero_bytes_in_calldata * 4`.

Let `isContractCreation` be a boolean indicating the respective event.

The current formula for determining the gas used per transaction, typically described as `nonzero_bytes_in_calldata * 16 + zero_bytes_in_calldata * 4`, is equivalent to:

```python
tx.gasused = (
    21000 \ 
        + STANDARD_TOKEN_COST * tokens_in_calldata \
        + evm_gas_used \
        + isContractCreation * (32000 + InitCodeWordGas * words(calldata))
)
```

The formula for determining the gas used per transaction changes to:

```python
tx.gasUsed = {
    21000 \ 
    + 
    max (
        STANDARD_TOKEN_COST * tokens_in_calldata \
           + evm_gas_used \
           + isContractCreation * (32000 + InitCodeWordGas * words(calldata)),
        TOTAL_COST_FLOOR_PER_TOKEN * tokens_in_calldata
    )
```

Any transaction with a gas limit less than `21000 + TOTAL_COST_FLOOR_PER_TOKEN * tokens_in_calldata` is invalid. This limitation exists because transactions must be able to pay for the floor price of their call data without relying the execution of the transaction. There are valid cases where `gasUsed` will be below this floor price, but the floor price needs to be reserved in the transaction gas limit.

## Rationale

The current maximum block size is approximately 1.79 MB (`30_000_000/16`). One can create blocks full of zero bytes that go up to 7.5 MB, but it is now standard to wrap blocks with snappy compression at the p2p layer and so such zero-byte-heavy blocks would end up smaller than 1.79 MB in practice. With the implementation of [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md) this increased to ~2.54 MB. Furthermore, the cost for calldata bytes hasn't been adjusted since [EIP-2028](./eip-2028).

This proposal aims to increase the cost of calldata to 10/40 gas for transactions that do not exceed a certain threshold of gas spent on EVM operations. This change will significantly reduce the maximum block size by limiting the number and size of pure-data transactions that can fit into a single block. Specifically, by adjusting the cost of calldata bytes to from 4/16 to 10/40 gas for DA transactions, the goal is to lower the maximum possible block size to roughly 0.72 MB without impacting the vast majority of users.


This reduction makes room for increasing the block gas limit or the number of blobs, while ensuring network security and efficiency. 
Importantly, regular users (sending ETH/Tokens/NFTs, engaging in DeFi, social media, restaking, bridging, etc.) who do not use Ethereum almost exclusively for DA, may remain unaffected.
The calldata cost for transactions involving significant EVM computation remains at 4/16 gas per byte, ensuring those transactions experience no change.


## Backwards Compatibility

This is a backwards incompatible gas repricing that requires a scheduled network upgrade.

Wallet developers and node operators MUST update their handling of gas estimation to accommodate the new calldata cost rules. Specifically:

1. **Wallets**: Wallets using `eth_estimateGas` to calculate the gas limit for transactions MUST be updated to ensure that they correctly account for the `TOTAL_COST_FLOOR_PER_TOKEN` parameter. Failure to do so could result in underestimating gas, leading to failed transactions.
   
2. **Node Software**: RPC methods like `eth_estimateGas` must incorporate the revised formula for gas calculation to ensure accurate responses to client requests. Node developers MUST ensure compatibility with the updated calldata pricing logic.

Users will be able to continue operating with no changes to their workflows, but underlying wallet and RPC implementations must be updated to ensure smooth functioning.

## Security Considerations

As the maximum possible block size is reduced, no security concerns were raised.

In some cases, it might seem advantageous to combine two transactions into one to reduce costs—for example, bundling a transaction that uses a lot of calldata but minimal EVM resources with another that heavily uses EVM resources. However, this is not a significant concern for several reasons:

1. This type of bundling is already possible today. Combining multiple transactions into one can save the 21,000 gas cost for each additional transaction beyond the first, a feature explicitly supported in [ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md).
2. Such bundling does not bypass the block size reduction goals achieved by this EIP.
3. In practice, transaction bundling faces challenges such as the need for trust and coordination, which often make it impractical to implement.

These factors ensure that transaction bundling does not pose a significant issue.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
