---
eip: 4341
title: Unicoded NFT Standard
description: For on-chain logographic languages and emojis
author: Simon Tian (@simontianx)
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/3782
status: Draft
type: Standards Track,
category: ERC
created: 2021-10-01
replaces (*optional): <EIP number(s)>
---

## Abstract
A vanilla non-fungible token standard proposed by [EIP-3754](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-3754.md)
combined with the established **[unicode](https://home.unicode.org/)** system
can create an on-chain logographic system for representing language characters
that are **[logographs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logogram)**. Examples
include _hanzi_ in Mandarin, _kanji_ in Japanese, _hanja_ in Korean, and etc.

## Motivation
A logograph is a written character that represents a word or morpheme, whereas
a unicode is an information technology standard for the consistent encoding,
representation, and handling of texts. If the tokenId of an NFT is specified as
a certain unicode, then it is perfect to represent a logograpic character on-chain.

This standard aims to combine the two and introduce the necessary functionalities
for batch transfer and representation of logographic characters. As a result, an
on-chain language system can be built for logograpic languages.

For non-logographic languages such as English, although the same standard can
be applied, the marginal utility is minimal to be practically useful. However,
for logographic languages, since a rich amount of meanings can be transmitted in
just a few characters, this standard is therefore particularly valuable. Emojis
are similar with logographs and can be included as well.

A motivating example is instead of sending the two Chinese characters of the
Great Wall `长城`, two NFTs with IDs `#38271` and `#22478` respectively can be
transferred in a batch. The two IDs are corresponding to the decimal unicode of
the two characters. The receiving end decodes the IDs and retrieves the original
characters. A key point is the ordering information matters in this scenario
since the tuples `(38271, 22478)` and `(22478, 38271)` can be decoded as
`长城` and `城长`, respectively, and both are legitimate words in the Chinese
language. This illustrates the key difference between this standard and ERC1155.

Besides, in the eastern Asian culture, characters are sometimes considered or
practically used as gifts in holidays such as Spring Feastival, etc.
`(24685, 21916, 21457, 36001)` `恭喜发财` can be used literally as a gift to
express the best wishes for financial prosperity. That said, logographs do possess
the nature of an asset, which is well resembled by this standard.

What is even more interesting is in that culture, people consider ancient teachings
as treasures which are usually written in a concise way such that a handful of
characters can unfold a rich amount of meanings. Modern people now get a reliable
technical means to pass down their words, poems and proverbs to the future
generations by sending tokens.

Other practical and interesting applications include Chinese chess, wedding
vows, family generation quotes and sayings, funeral commendation words, prayers,
anecdotes and etc.

## Specification
```
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

/**
    @title EIP-4341 Unicoded NFT Standard
    @dev See https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4341
 */
interface ERC4341 /* is ERC165 */ {
    event Transfer(address indexed _operator, address indexed _from, address indexed _to, uint256 _id, uint256 _value);

    event TransferBatch(address indexed _operator, address indexed _from, address indexed _to, uint256[] _ids, uint256[] _values);

    event ApprovalForAll(address indexed _owner, address indexed _operator, bool _approved);

    function safeTransferFrom(address _from, address _to, uint256 _id, uint256 _value, bytes calldata _data) external;

    function safeBatchTransferFrom(address _from, address _to, uint256[] calldata _ids, uint256[] calldata _values, bytes calldata _data) external;

    function balanceOf(address _owner, uint256 _id) external view returns (uint256);

    function balanceOfBatch(address[] calldata _owners, uint256[] calldata _ids) external view returns (uint256[] memory);

    function retrievePhrase(address _owner, uint256 _phraseId) external view returns (uint256[] memory);

    function setApprovalForAll(address _operator, bool _approved) external;

    function isApprovedForAll(address _owner, address _operator) external view returns (bool);
}
```

## Rationale
If we think of [ERC1155](./eip-1155.md) together with [ERC721](./eip-721.md) being
in the track of representing crypto-assets with tokens, then [EIP-3754](./eip-3754.md)
and this standard EIP-4341 are in the track of representing the utility sides of NFTs.

### Ordering information
Compared with ERC1155, this standard is particularly useful in logographic
representations. Therefore, the ordering information in a batch of tokenIds is
maintained whereas such information is completed discarded in ERC1155. It is not
a problem in ERC1155 since no valuable information is encoded in the order of
tokenIds, however, in this standard, as illustrated above, it is crucial in
decoding the unicodes of a sequence of logographs in the correct order.

### `URI`
To further distinguish this standard from ERC1155, `URI`s should be excluded in
implementation of this standard. No external information is required to be encoded
with the tokens. TokenIds are the sole source of information to transfer ideas,
thoughts and even emotions.

### Phrase and sentence
In a language system, characters in a batch form a phrase or even a sentence. To
retrieve it effectively, a `phraseId` is introduced. The phrases or sentences are
not meant to be disseminated at any time. They should be kept in storage as a
form of assets that can be retrieved and interpreted, but not transferred. The
tokens themselves, however, are able to be transferred.

## Backwards Compatibility
[EIP-3754](./eip-3754.md) is a pre-requisite to this standard.

## Reference Implementation
https://github.com/simontianx/ERC4341

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
