---
eip: 6932
title: Subscription-Based Token
description: ERC-20 extension providing access to a service or product that requires recurring payments.
author: 360 Core <hello@360coreinc.com>, Robin Rajput (@0xRobinR)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/erc-subscription-based-erc20-token/13964
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-04-25
requires: 20
---

## Abstract

The subscription-based [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token extends the basic [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token standard with a `subscribe` and `unsubscribe` function, which allow users to subscribe or unsubscribe from the subscription service. The `subscriptionFee` and `subscriptionFrequency` variables define the cost and frequency of the subscription. The `nextPaymentDate` mapping keeps track of the next payment date for each subscriber.

This EIP proposes the standardization of a subscription token on the Ethereum blockchain, enabling automatic periodic deductions from user balances as determined by the merchant subscriber. The Subscription Token aims to simplify and streamline subscription-based services on the Ethereum network, offering enhanced convenience and efficiency for users and merchants alike.

We will be also adding `renewSubscription` functions to the token contract, that can be used by token holders to renew their subscription to a service or product that requires recurring payments in the form of the token.

## Motivation

The rise of subscription-based business models necessitates a standardized approach to handle recurring payments on the Ethereum blockchain. Currently, users often manually initiate subscription payments, resulting in inconvenience and potential disruptions in service delivery. By introducing a Subscription Token, users can seamlessly authorize periodic deductions, enabling uninterrupted access to subscribed services.

The subscription-based [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token provides a more flexible and convenient way to manage recurring payments. It can be used for a wide range of services and products that require regular payments, such as subscription-based content platforms, gaming services, and more.

## Specification

The Subscription Token implements an interface following the guidelines defined in [ERC-1337](./eip-1337.md), ensuring consistency and interoperability across different implementations. Key features include:

- Auto Deduction: Merchants, acting as subscribers, can set the subscription interval and associated payment amount for their services. This information is encoded within the Subscription Token contract, enabling automatic deductions from user balances at regular intervals without requiring manual intervention.

- Balance Check: Users can verify the remaining balance of their subscription tokens at any given time. This transparency empowers users to monitor their subscriptions and make informed decisions regarding their ongoing commitment to the service.

- Flexibility: The Subscription Token framework accommodates various subscription models, such as monthly, quarterly, or annual billing cycles. Additionally, merchants have the option to define trial periods, upgrade/downgrade plans, and cancellation policies, providing a versatile foundation for a wide range of subscription-based businesses.

- Security: The Subscription Token employs established security measures, including the use of cryptographic signatures, to ensure the integrity and authenticity of subscription-related transactions. This protects both users and merchants from unauthorized access and potential malicious activities.

### SubscriptionToken

#### subscribers

subscribers list for the subscription

#### subscriptionInfo

struct containing metadata of the subscription, ex, `subscriptionID`, `subscriptionName`, `subscriptionDesc` and `subscriptionTandC`, and many more fields if reqd.

#### subscriptionFee

the fee amount for the subcription

#### subscriptionFrequency

frequency of subscription, interval at which the `subscriptionFee` will be charged.

#### subscribe

function to subscribe toh the subscription

#### unsubscribe

revoke subscription

```solidity
interface ISubscriptionERC20 {
  /// @dev map subscribers address, returns address(0) if `idx` is not found
  /// @param idx: the index of the map values
  /// @return the address at index `idx` of subscribers
  function subscribers(uint idx) external view returns (address);

  /// @dev can be extended accorging to the requirements
  /// @return subscriptionID, and metadata payload provided, may vary
  function subscriptionInfo() external view returns ( uint, string memory, string memory, string memory );

  /// @dev subscribes to the subscription, can be payable
  function subscribe() external;

  /// @dev unsubscribe the subscription
  function unsubscribe() external;

  /// @dev view or pure can be used
  /// @return the subscription fee
  function subscriptionFee() external view returns (uint256);

  /// @dev view or pure can be used
  /// @return get the subscription frequency
  function subscriptionFrequency() external view returns (uint);
}
```

## Rationale

The introduction of the Subscription Token EIP addresses several critical aspects of the Ethereum ecosystem, providing a rationale for its adoption and implementation.

Traditional subscription models often require users to manually initiate recurring payments, leading to inconvenience and potential disruptions in service delivery. By establishing a Subscription Token standard, users can authorize automatic deductions from their balances at predefined intervals. This automation simplifies the subscription management process, ensuring uninterrupted access to subscribed services without the need for repetitive manual actions.

## Backwards Compatibility

No backward compatibility issues found.

## Security Considerations

Subscription Tokens may require users to sign transactions or provide cryptographic proofs for subscription-related actions. Proper key management practices should be followed to protect users' private keys and prevent unauthorized access. Encouraging the use of hardware wallets or secure key storage solutions can mitigate the risk of key compromise.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
