---
eip: 1891
title: Contract-based Account Versioning
author: Wei Tang (@sorpaas)
discussions-to: https://github.com/sorpaas/EIPs/issues/6
status: Abandoned
type: Standards Track
category: Core
superseded-by: 1702
created: 2019-03-31
---

## Simple Summary

Provide an alternative proposal compared with EIP-1702 / ECIP-1040 /
EIP-1707, with the following advantages:

* We don't need to modify existing account state format.
* We don't need to modify how precompiled contracts are invoked.
* The version bytes cannot be forged.

The basic idea is that we use a contract address' storage to store an
account's version bytes. Note that it is also possible to extend this
scheme to store other information about an account.

## Specification

Define `VERSION_CONTRACT_ADDR` at location `0x0000..00f1`.

After `FORK_BLOCK`, set nonce of `VERSION_CONTRACT_ADDR` to `1`.

Define two new opcodes `VCREATE` and `VCREATE2` at `0xf6` and `0xf7`
respectively.

`VCREATE` takes 4 stack arguments (version, value, input offset, input
size), and `VCREATE2` takes 5 stack arguments (version, endowment,
memory_start, memory_length, salt). Note that except the stack item
`version`, other arguments are the same as `CREATE` and `CREATE2`.

The two new opcodes behave identically to `CREATE` and `CREATE2`,
except that:

* Gas cost is `CREATE` or `CREATE2`'s gas cost plus `20000`.
* Before writing the contract code resulted from `VCREATE` and
  `VCREATE2`, check the following conditions. If any following
  conditions does not meet or operation fails, return out-of-gas.
  * The `version` provided is supported version bytes. 
  * Invoke additional checks (if any) required by the specific version
    bytes.
  * If the above two checks are successful
    * Let `address` be the to-be-deployed contract address.
    * Set storage of `VERSION_CONTRACT_ADDR` where key is `address`
      (prefixed with 0 so that it's 256 bits), and value is `version`.
      
Before invoking a contract, either by a transaction, `CALL`, `STATICCALL`, `CALLCODE` or `DELEGATECALL`:

* Check whether the storage of `VERSION_CONTRACT_ADDR` has non-zero
  value with key `address` (`I_a` in yellow paper, prefixed with 0 so that it's 256 bits).
  * If so, invoke the VM version defined by value.
  * Otherwise, invoke the default (legacy) VM version.
  
When self-destruct a contract:

* Set storage value of `VERSION_CONTRACT_ADDR` where key is `address`
  (prefixed with 0 so that it's 256 bits) to zero.
  
Contract creation transaction always uses the default (legacy) VM version.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via
[CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
