---
eip: 3368
title: Increase block rewards to 3 ETH, with 2 Year Decay to 1 ETH Scheduled
author: Michael D. Carter (@bitsbetrippin)
discussions-to: https://discord.gg/3sjBbWKM4E (ETH R&D 1559-mining)
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2021-03-11
---

## Simple Summary
Changes the block reward paid to proof-of-work (POW) miners to 3 ETH from existing 2 ETH, but kicks off a 0.25 quarterly drop to a final 1.0 ETH Reward 2 Years Later.

## Abstract
Starting with `FORK_BLKNUM` block rewards will be increased to a base of 3 ETH, uncle and nephew rewards will be adjusted accordingly. Every 3 months after, measured by EPOCH count, Block Reward drops 0.25 every quarter till Ethereum Block Reward reaches 1.0 BR per Block.

## Motivation
With the passing of EIP-1559, the potential steep reduction of Ethereum Miner fee's, which currently are averaging a doubling of the exiting block reward have several scenerios where it can become the 50% key factor on keeping ethereum mining participation growing the current all time high hashpower, all the way to the London hard fork release. There are several scenerios where this can create a steep hashrate decrease when the BASEFEE starts to get burned vs distributed to miners. This can create an exteciential risk to ethereum's network by incentivizing miners to move to more profitable solutions, including broker services such as Nicehash and Miningrigrentals. To ward off this threat, a recommend action is to temporarly increase Eth Mining Rewards by +1 offset then began to decrease -2 Eth over 8 quarters, 2 full years from London's Hardfork. This should align well with the current optimisitic ETH 2.0 PoW/PoS handoff and appropriately set Eth Inflation on a managed reduction against a schedule that can be planned for. Additionally this provides a higher incentive for price discovery which can offset any further steep impacts for the mining security budget. 

## Specification
#### Adjust Block, Uncle, and Nephew rewards
Adjust the block reward to `new_block_reward`, where

    new_block_reward = 3_000_000_000_000_000_000 if block.number >= FORK_BLKNUM else block.reward

(5E18 wei, or 3,000,000,000,000,000,000 wei, or 3 ETH).

Analogue, if an uncle is included in a block for `block.number >= FORK_BLKNUM` such that `block.number - uncle.number = k`, the uncle reward is

    new_uncle_reward = (8 - k) * new_block_reward / 8

This is the existing formula for uncle rewards, simply adjusted with `new_block_reward`.

The nephew reward for `block.number >= FORK_BLKNUM` is

    new_nephew_reward = new_block_reward / 32

This is the existing formula for nephew rewards, simply adjusted with `new_block_reward`.

## Rationale
A 3 ETH base reward with quarterly schedule on decrease. 0.25 reduction per 3 months for 2 years to a total reduction of -2 Eth.

## Backwards Compatibility
There are no known backward compatibility issues with the introduction of this EIP.

## Security Considerations
There are no known security issues presented by this change.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
