---
eip: 1283
title: Net gas metering for SSTORE without dirty maps
author: Wei Tang (@sorpaas)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2018-08-01
---

## Abstract

This EIP proposes net gas metering changes for SSTORE opcode, as an
alternative for EIP-1087. It tries to be friendlier to implementations
that uses different opetimiazation strategies for storage change
caches.

## Motivation

EIP-1087 proposes a way to adjust gas metering for SSTORE opcode,
enabling new usages on this opcodes where it is previously too
expensive. However, EIP-1087 requires keeping a dirty map for storage
changes, and implictly makes the assumption that a transaction's
storage changes are committed to the storage trie at the end of a
transaction. This works well for some implementations, but not for
others. Some implementations do the optimization to only commit
storage changes at the end of a block. For them, it is possible to
know a storage's original value and current value, but it is not
possible to iterate over all storage changes. For EIP-1087, they will
need to keep a separate dirty map to keep track of gas costs. This
adds additional memory consumptions.

This EIP proposes an alternative way for gas metering on SSTORE, using
information that is more universially available to most
implementations:

* *Storage slot's original value*. This is the value of the storage if
  a call/create reversion happens on the current VM execution
  context. It is universially available because all clients need to
  keep track of call/create reversion.
* *Storage slot's current value*. 
* Refund counter.

## Specification

Term *original value* is as defined in Motivation. *Current value*
refers to the storage slot value before SSTORE happens. *New value*
refers to the storage slot value after SSTORE happens.

Replace SSTORE opcode gas cost calculation (including refunds) with
the following logic:

* If *current value* equals *new value* (this is a no-op), 200 gas is
  deducted.
* If *current value* does not equal *new value*
  * If *original value* equals *current value* (this storage slot has
    not been changed by the current execution context)
    * If *original value* is 0, 20000 gas is deducted.
    * Otherwise, 5000 gas is deducted. If *new value* is 0, add 15000
      gas to refund counter.
  * If *original value* does not equal *current value* (this storage
    slot is dirty), 200 gas is deducted.
    * If *original value* equals *new value*
      * If *original value* is 0, add 19800 gas to refund counter.
      * Otherwise, add 4800 gas to refund counter.

Refund counter works as before -- it is limited to half of the gas
consumed.

## Rationale

This EIP mostly archives what EIP-1087 tries to do, but without the
complexity of introducing the concept of "dirty maps". One limitation
is that the dirtiness tracking only applies to current execution
context -- if a sub-frame executes on the same address as the
parent-frame, it won't benefit from the parent dirtiness gas refund.

Examine examples provided in EIP-1087's Motivation:

* If a contract with empty storage sets slot 0 to 1, then back to 0,
  it will be charged `20000 + 200 - 19800 = 400` gas.
* A contract with empty storage that increments slot 0 5 times will be
  charged `20000 + 5 * 200 = 21000` gas.
* A balance transfer from account A to account B followed by a
  transfer from B to C, with all accounts having nonzero starting and
  ending balances
  * If the token contract has multi-send function, it will cost
    `5000 * 3 + 200 - 4800 = 10400` gas.
  * If this transfer from A to B to C is invoked by a third-party
    contract, and the token contract has no multi-send function, then
    it won't benefit from this EIP's gas reduction.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP requires a hard fork to implement. No gas cost increase is
anticipated, and many contract will see gas reduction.

## Test Cases

To be added.

## Implementation

To be added.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
