---
eip: 7525
title: Expire state of the inactive accounts
description: Expire the status of inactive accounts after a certain period.
author: Dan Park (@coldpak), Ben Kim <ben@over.network>, Jade Shin <jade@over.network>, Iron Lee<iron@over.network>, et al.
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/add-eip-expire-state-of-the-inactive-accounts/15904
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-09-25
---

## Abstract

In the Execution Layer, accounts that have been inactive for a certain period are expired. The expired state can be recovered through a special transaction for restoration. This significantly lowers the entry barrier for node operation by maintaining only the minimal required state for validation.

## Motivation

Numerous attempts to create a stateless roadmap exist, but we still lack practical solutions, and the state size keeps increasing quickly. Recently, researchers at a16z pointed out the significant challenges in maintaining a stateless chain, due to the heavy load of witness updates. Given these hurdles, we believe that developing mechanisms for state expiry is crucial for the community.

According to our analysis, we have observed that 95% of the accounts in Execution Layer have been inactive for at least one month. The inactive accounts refer to those that have not been in engaged or affected by any transactions.

In other words, this means that only a mere 5% of the data is utilized when validating the data in the current Execution Layer. In most situations, historical data is not essential and just serves to significantly burden the system.

This EIP enhances node efficiency by keeping data only for active accounts needed for data verification. This approach optimizes node operations and reduces the burden of managing inactive accounts by expiring them periodically.

## Specification

### State Data Management

The data that was previously managed in a single database is divided and managed separately for accounts and the rest. To facilitate ease of deletion, trie data structure is stored in the database, separated for each epoch.

### Sweep

A config called `SWEEP_EPOCH` is added to specify how often to expire inactive accounts. `SWEEP_EPOCH` refers to the period of performing sweeps, and sweeps are executed every epoch corresponding to the value specified here.

The state trie stores the activities of each account every epoch. At each checkpoint block, the previously created trie becomes closable and then it starts from an empty trie. We call the frozen trie a checkpoint trie.

During the subsequent epochs, when the state of any account needs to be updated, if the account is not in the current trie, we perform a process to find information about the account from the previous checkpoint trie and add it to the current trie. If the account is already in the current trie, the update is performed immediately.

In this process, the account-related state is stored in the DB handling the account data mentioned earlier. The sweep is only conducted for account-related data and does not apply to things like storage data.

### Restoration Data

We define the data format needed for recovery. The recovery data includes the following:

`[chain_id, expire_epoch, target, target_epoch, fee, fee_recipient, signature_y_parity, signature_r, signature_s]`

- `chain_id`: The identifier information of the chain where the recovery transaction will be executed.
- `expire_epoch`: The epoch limit for which this data is valid.
- `target`: The account address to be recovered.
- `target_epoch`: The minimum epoch point to be recovered.
- `fee`: The fee to be paid for the recovery to `fee_recipient`.
- `fee_recipient`: The account address to receive the recovery fee.
- `signature_y_parity`, `signature_r`, `signature_s`: The signature for the recovery data. The account that generated this signature is the one that actually pays the fee.

This structure provides a mechanism that rewards the archive nodes that provide the data needed for recovery, and allows another account to pay the fee in case the fee required for recovery is insufficient.

### Restoration Transaction

For recovery purposes, we need recovery data, and this data should be included in transactions. To achieve this, we introduce a new [EIP-2718](../EIPS/eip-2718.md) transaction specifically for recovery.

The format of this transaction with the addition of the `restore_data` field to [EIP-1559](../EIPS/eip-1559) is as follows:

`[chain_id, nonce, max_priority_fee_per_gas, max_fee_per_gas, gas_limit, destination, amount, data, access_list, restore_data, signature_y_parity, signature_r, signature_s]`

### Account State Change

When an account expires, all of its states are considered as if they have been set to their initial values.

We additionally store in the account state the `restored_epoch`, which is information about the epoch when it was restored. `restored_epoch` enables the verification of whether an account has a history of restoration. The initial value of `restored_epoch` is the current epoch - 1.

The `restored_epoch` not only plays a role similar to the nonce during the restoration process, but also makes it possible to selectively determine the point of restoration, eliminating the need to verify the state from the genesis block.

Additionally, it plays a crucial role in contract creation, helping to avoid regeneration of the same address.

### Restoration Process

```python
def restore_account(account, proofs):
  restored_epoch = account.restored_epoch

  for proof in proofs:
    root_hash = get_last_checkpoint_block_by_epoch(restored_epoch).state_root

    if is_accurate_merkle_proof(root_hash, account, proof): # Proof is non-void proof
      restored_account = extract_account(merkle_proof)
      account.restored_epoch = restored_account.restored_epoch
      account.balance += restored_account.balance
      account.nonce += restored_account.nonce
    elif is_accurate_void_proof(root_hash, account, proof): # Proof is void proof
      restored_epoch -= 1
    else: # Proof is invalid
      raise Exception("Inaccurate proof")
```

### Restoration Cost

The recovery process involves tasks such as reading or verifying data and performing decoding. Some tasks are executed for each epoch, so the total cost is determined by the length of the epoch you want to recover.

The tasks performed during the recovery process include the following:

| Operation | Gas |
| --- | --- |
| read restoredEpoch | 20 |
| read nonce | 20 |
| read balance | 20 |
| Keccak256 | 100 |
| Ecrecover | 3000 |
| CallValueTransfer | 9000 |
| CallNewAccount | 25000 |
| read header | 800 per epoch |
| RLP decoding | 1 per word |
| verifyProof | 100 per epoch, 2 per word |

Dynamic cost refers to the cost that varies with each epoch and is proportional to the length of the input.

The cost incurred in each epoch consists of 1 **`verifyProof`** and 1 **`read header`** operation. If the epoch is non-void, it also includes 1 **`RLP decoding`** operation. These operations incur a cost of approximately 900 per epoch.

The cost that varies with the length of the input consists of 1 **`RLP decoding`** and 1 **`verifyProof`** operation, both proportional to the size of the input. These operations incur a cost of 3 per word.

The total recovery cost is as follows:

$$
\text{Total Restoration Cost} = 37000 + 900\times{Epoch} + 3\times{words} + \text{Memory Cost}
$$

## Rationale

### Optimizing State Data Management Cost

In a key-value database like LevelDB, the operation of deleting data with a specific prefix pattern can become more burdensome as the number of data entries to be deleted increases.

To optimize this cost, we have implemented a system where a separate database is created and managed for each epoch. If data for a certain epoch is not needed, instead of going through the process of traversing the trie, you can simply delete the file corresponding to that epoch.

### Checking the Restoration History

Currently, the account's state alone doesn't provide a way to confirm its restoration status. Without the ability to distinguish restoration, there is no way to handle duplicate restoration transactions. To address this issue, we store additional information, the `restored_epoch`, in the account's state to indicate the restoration point.

Moreover, `restored_epoch` can also serve as a checkpoint for the account's state. The `restored_epoch` plays a crucial role in enabling the selection of a restoration point. As the cost of restoration increases with more required proofs, having `restored_epoch` allows you to determine the optimal time and method for account restoration, depending on the situation.

As a result, this approach addresses cost and size concerns by enabling restoration to be conducted across multiple transactions.

### Preventing Replay Attack

When an account is expired, the nonce value of that address is actually reset to initial value 0. When the nonce is reset, it can no longer serve to prevent replay attacks. To prevent such issues, we ensure that during the recovery process, the nonces from previous time points are added to the current nonce to avoid duplication of nonce.

By checking not only the nonce but also the `restored_epoch` when executing a transaction, we prevent old transactions from being executed again.

### Ensuring Data Accessibility

It's important to note that this EIP does not propose discarding any data. Instead, data related to inactive accounts will be **retained** in archive nodes and can be accessed when necessary.

For the restoration of historical data, it is necessary to maintain a sufficient number of nodes operating in archive mode. To encourage this, we need to establish on chain incentives for nodes to run in archive mode. Nodes operating in this mode would earn fees in exchange for supplying the data required for restoration. These fees would be determined based on principle of supply and demand.

In addition to the approach suggested here, within the Ethereum community, there are active discussions on various methodologies aimed at ensuring data accessibility during the history and state expiration processes.

### Account State Expiry

We employ an approach of expiring the states of inactive accounts on an epoch-by-epoch basis. To restore expired accounts, proof of the expired account's existence must be available. With this approach, deleted accounts still exists in Merkle trie, allowing for potential recovery through the submission of relevant proofs in the future.

By expiring inactive accounts, we can reduce the storage requirements for nodes significantly.  This makes the network more accessible for participants and improving decentralization.

By focusing on a smaller set of active accounts, the overall efficiency of the network improves. This enhancement can also potentially speed up block validation times, leading to better network performance.

### Storage Slot Expiry

We haven't addressed the storage slot, primarily because predicting scenarios where certain data might be absent during contract development can be quite challenging. Consequently, for the stability, it's necessary to restore all data related to the contract. Selectively restoring only a portion of the contract-related state could potentially lead to unexpected issues. Restoring all data requires having all proofs, yet storing this data on the blockchain is inefficient.

## Backwards Compatibility

With the implementation of this EIP, a new field is added to the account state and this field is used in the calculation of the nonce. This means that the nonce can increase by a value other than 1 during the sweep or restoration process. In other words, the Tx Pool should no longer assume that the nonce increases by 1.

Since the nonce alone cannot sufficiently fulfill its role, it is safe to use the `restored_epoch` together with the nonce in other parts where the nonce was used.

## Security Considerations

If this proposal is applied, there is a possibility that some core contracts, such as deposit contracts used for staking, could be swept. If such contracts are swept, it could lead to a problem where the core functions of the chain cannot be used. It is necessary to respond by methods such as reflecting these contracts into the trie at each epoch.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
