---
eip: 7526
title: On-chain NFT royalty enforcement
description: A game-theoretic mechanism to induce truthful revelation of NFT sales and their value to allow for decentralised royalty enforcement.
author: David Huber (@cxkoda), Arran Schlosberg (@aschlosberg)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7526-on-chain-nft-royalty-enforcement/15917
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-09-25
requires: 165, 721, 2981
---

## Abstract

We describe a mechanism for which, upon transfer of an [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) Non-Fungible Token (NFT), the dominant strategy of the new owner is to truthfully reveal if the owning entity has changed and, if so, report their valuation of the token and pay a creator-specified royalty based on said valuation.

## Motivation

While [ERC-2981](./eip-2981.md) introduced a standard for contracts to signal a royalty amount to be paid to the creator upon sale of an NFT, it didn't describe a means of enforcement.
It went so far as to state that "payment must be voluntary, as transfer mechanisms… \[do\] not always imply a sale occurred".

The difficulty with on-chain enforcement stems from the incomplete information available to enforcement contracts.
Such contracts are unaware of both the nature of token transfers (e.g. sale, private, gift, etc.) and any corresponding flow of funds, which are commonly needed to compute the royalty to be paid to the creator.
Royalty systems have therefore relied on external parties to supply this information, which can either introduce centralisation, or be manipulated if the involved parties are dishonest.
This problem is aggravated in over-the-counter (OTC) deals because the flow of funds can be handled entirely via hidden channels.

However, on-chain royalty enforcement can still be feasible in practice by creating a sufficiently strong incentive or penalty to force participating parties to provide honest information.
We describe one such approach, a game-theoretic mechanism that targets the primary actors in a transfer (i.e. the previous and new token owner) as the only players, and induce the new owner to truthfully supply the information required for enforcement.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

For each `tokenId` we introduce a set of addresses whose members MAY transfer the token to themselves without payment by calling `TBD(…, tokenId, …)`, which we will refer to as a *take-back*.
The set MUST be initially empty.
For every ERC-721 transfer, except for initial mint, the take-back set of the corresponding `tokenId` MUST be appended with the previous owner (i.e. the transfer's `from` address).

The new token owner MAY make a royalty payment of any amount, which MUST be accepted by the token contract via a dedicated function, `TBD(…, tokenId, …) payable`.
Upon receipt of royalties, the respective take-back set MUST be emptied (i.e. transfer permissions collapse back to standard ERC-721 rules).
After each token transfer, there SHOULD be a grace period during which the token is frozen and take-backs are disabled to allow the new owner to decide to either pay the royalty or allow the take-back set to grow.
If such a grace period is implemented, tokens MUST be unfrozen upon receiving royalties, or at the end of the period.

In addition to clearing the take-back set, receipt of royalties MUST begin a temporary window during which *any* address MAY purchase the token for a price that is a function of the royalty received (this can be viewed as the inverse of the `royaltyInfo()` function of ERC-2981).
This process is referred to as *auto-listing* and is not limited to addresses in the take-back set.
The token MUST NOT be transferrable for the duration of the auto-listing.
Implementations MAY specify the duration of the auto-listing window at their discretion but it MUST be finite and SHOULD be long enough to allow arbitrage opportunities to be detected.
After expiration of the auto-listing, transfer permissions MUST collapse back to standard ERC-721 rules.

In the event of a sale due to an auto-listing:

1. The token MUST be transferred to the address paying the auto-listing price;
2. The price MUST be transferred to the original token owner;
3. The corresponding royalties MUST be reimbursed (i.e. the same address receives both the returned royalties and the sale price); and
4. The new owner MUST be subject to the same mechanism rules; i.e. take-back, royalty payment, and auto-listing.

If no sale occurs during the auto-listing window, the contract SHOULD transfer the royalty payment to the NFT creator.

Marketplaces facilitating sales SHOULD forward royalties in the same transaction as the sale to guarantee payment within the grace period, thus immediately unfreezing the token.
Marketplaces MAY allow buyers to configure either the auto-listing price or the royalties paid (as the outcome is equivalent), or they MAY provide sensible default values or employ more sophisticated heuristics at their discretion.
If allowing buyers to configure values, marketplaces MAY limit this to the auto-listing price for ease of understanding as royalties are then conceptually equivalent to ERC-2981's `royaltyInfo(autoListingPrice)`, which is a concept familiar to end users.

```solidity
interface IERCTBD {
  // TBD
}
```

## Rationale

TBD 

TODO: a yellow paper with proofs of strategy dominance will be included in the `../assets/eip-7526` directory; this is being finalised. A summary of the findings will be added to this section of the EIP, but the paper is necessary due to heavy use of LaTeX.

### Summary rationale for the draft:

* Accepting the risk of take-back in the event of no royalty being paid is only a rational decision if the same entity controls both addresses; i.e. a change in beneficial owner of the token results in a royalty payment but transfer between one's own addresses doesn't require one.
* The auto-listing window ensures *truthful* revelation of the value of the token.

## Backwards Compatibility

No backward compatibility issues found.

## Reference Implementation

TBD

## Security Considerations

Needs discussion.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
