---
eip: 5313
title: Light Contract Ownership
description: An interface for identifying ownership of contracts
author: William Entriken (@fulldecent)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-5313-light-contract-ownership/10052
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-07-22
requires: 165, 173
---

## Abstract

This specification defines the minimum interface required to identify an account that controls a contract.

## Motivation

This is a slimmed-down alternative to [EIP-173](./eip-173.md).

## Specification

The key word “MUST” in this document is to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Every contract compliant with this EIP MUST implement the `EIP5313` interface.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0
pragma solidity ^0.8.15;

/// @title EIP-5313 Light Contract Ownership Standard
interface EIP5313 {
    /// @notice Get the address of the owner    
    /// @return The address of the owner
    function owner() view external returns(address);
}
```

## Rationale

Key factors influencing the standard: 

- Minimize the number of functions in the interface
- Backwards compatibility with existing contracts

This standard can be (and has been) extended by other standards to add additional ownership functionality. The smaller scope of this specification allows more and more straightforward ownership implementations, see limitations explained in EIP-173 under "other schemes that were considered".

Implementing EIP-165 could be a valuable addition to this interface specification. However, this EIP is being written to codify existing protocols that connect contracts (often NFTs), with third-party websites (often a well-known NFT marketplace).

## Backwards Compatibility

Every contract that implement EIP-173 already implements this specification.

## Security Considerations

Because this specification does not require EIP-165 (and even if it did, due to limits of ERC-165 especially with single-function interfaces) interrogating with EIP-5313 cannot result in complete certainty that the result is the owner. For example, another function with the same function signature may return some value that is interpreted by an EIP-5313 interrogator to be the owner. If an interrogator is only using EIP-5313 to identify if a claimant is the owner, then the impact of this risk is minimized. But if the interrogator is, for example, sending a valuable NFT to the EIP-5313 identified ownwer of any contract on the network, then the risk is heightened.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
