---
eip: 6120
title: Universal Token Router
description: A single router contract enables tokens to be sent to application contracts in the transfer-and-call pattern instead of approve-then-call.
author: Derivable (@derivable-labs), Zergity (@Zergity), Ngo Quang Anh (@anhnq82), BerlinP (@BerlinP), Khanh Pham (@blackskin18), Hal Blackburn (@h4l)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-6120-universal-token-router/12142
status: Review
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-12-12
requires: 20, 721, 1014, 1155
---

## Abstract

ETH is designed with *transfer-and-call* as the default behavior in a transaction. Unfortunately, [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) is not designed with that pattern in mind and newer standards cannot apply to the token contracts that have already been deployed.

Application and router contracts must use the *approve-then-call* pattern, which costs additional $n\times m\times l$ `approve` (or `permit`) signatures for $n$ contracts, $m$ tokens, and $l$ accounts. Not only these allowance transactions create a bad user experience, cost a lot of user fees and network storage, but they also put users at serious security risks as they often have to approve unaudited, unverified, and upgradable proxy contracts. The *approve-then-call* pattern is also quite error-prone, as many allowance-related bugs and exploits have been found recently.

The Universal Token Router (UTR) separates the token allowance from the application logic, allowing any token to be spent in a contract call the same way with ETH, without approving any other application contracts.

Tokens approved to the Universal Token Router can only be spent in transactions directly signed by their owner, and they have clearly visible token transfer behavior, including token types (ETH, [ERC-20](./eip-20.md), [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) or [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md)), `amountIn`, `amountOutMin`, and `recipient`.

The Universal Token Router contract is deployed at `0x2222C5F0999E74D8D88F7bbfE300147d34c22222` using the [EIP-1014](./eip-1014.md) SingletonFactory contract `0xce0042B868300000d44A59004Da54A005ffdcf9f` with a salt of `2750646675` across all EVM-compatible networks. This allows new token contracts to pre-configure it as a trusted spender, eliminating the need for approval transactions during their interactive usage.

## Motivation

When users approve their tokens to a contract, they trust that:

* it only spends the tokens with their permission (from `msg.sender` or `ecrecover`)
* it does not use `delegatecall` (e.g. upgradable proxies)

By ensuring the same security conditions above, the Universal Token Router can be shared by all interactive applications, saving most approval transactions for old tokens and **ALL** approval transactions for new tokens.

Before this EIP, when users sign transactions to spend their approved tokens, they trust the front-end code entirely to construct those transactions honestly and correctly. This puts them at great risk of phishing sites.

The Universal Token Router function arguments can act as a manifest for users when signing a transaction. With the support from wallets, users can see and review their expected token behavior instead of blindly trusting the application contracts and front-end code. Phishing sites will be much easier to detect and avoid for users.

Most of the application contracts are already compatible with the Universal Token Router and can use it to have the following benefits:

* Securely share the user token allowance with all other applications.
* Update their peripheral contracts as often as they want.
* Save development and security audit costs on router contracts.

The Universal Token Router promotes the **security-by-result** model in decentralized applications instead of **security-by-process**. By directly querying token balance change for output verification, user transactions can be secured even when interacting with erroneous or malicious contracts. With non-token results, application helper contracts can provide additional result-checking functions for UTR's output verification.

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “NOT RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

The main interface of the UTR contract:

```solidity
interface IUniversalTokenRouter {
    function exec(
        Output[] memory outputs,
        Action[] memory actions
    ) payable;
}
```

### Output Verification

`Output` defines the expected token balance change for verification.

```solidity
struct Output {
    address recipient;
    uint eip;           // token standard: 0 for ETH or EIP number
    address token;      // token contract address
    uint id;            // token id for ERC-721 and ERC-1155
    uint amountOutMin;
}
```

Token balances of the `recipient` address are recorded at the beginning and the end of the `exec` function for each item in `outputs`. Transaction will revert with `INSUFFICIENT_OUTPUT_AMOUNT` if any of the balance changes are less than its `amountOutMin`.

A special id `ERC_721_BALANCE` is reserved for ERC-721, which can be used in output actions to verify the total amount of all ids owned by the `recipient` address.

```solidity
ERC_721_BALANCE = keccak256('UniversalTokenRouter.ERC_721_BALANCE')
```

### Action

`Action` defines the token inputs and the contract call.

```solidity
struct Action {
    Input[] inputs;
    address code;       // contract code address
    bytes data;         // contract input data
}
```

### Input

`Input` defines the input token to transfer or prepare before the action contract is executed.

```solidity
struct Input {
    uint mode;
    address recipient;
    uint eip;           // token standard: 0 for ETH or EIP number
    address token;      // token contract address
    uint id;            // token id for ERC-721 and ERC-1155
    uint amountIn;
}
```

`mode` takes one of the following values:

* `PAYMENT = 0`: pend a payment for the token to be transferred from `msg.sender` to the `recipient` by calling `UTR.pay` from anywhere in the same transaction.
* `TRANSFER = 1`: transfer the token directly from `msg.sender` to the `recipient`.
* `CALL_VALUE = 2`: record the `ETH` amount to pass to the action as the call `value`.

Each input in the `inputs` argument is processed sequentially. For simplicity, duplicated `PAYMENT` and `CALL_VALUE` inputs are valid, but only the last `amountIn` value is used.

#### Payment Input

`PAYMENT` is the recommended mode for application contracts that use the *transfer-in-callback* pattern. E.g., flashloan contracts, Uniswap/v3-core, Derivable, etc.

For each `Input` with `PAYMENT` mode, at most `amountIn` of the token can be transferred from `msg.sender` to the `recipient` by calling `UTR.pay` from anywhere in the same transaction.

```
UTR
 |
 | PAYMENT
 | (payments pended for UTR.pay)
 |
 |                                  Application Contracts
action.code.call ---------------------> |
                                        |
UTR.pay <----------------------- (call) |
                                        |
 | <-------------------------- (return) |
 |
 | (clear all pending payments)
 |
END
```

Token's allowance and `PAYMENT` are essentially different as:

* allowance: allow a specific `spender` to transfer the token to anyone at any time.
* `PAYMENT`: allow anyone to transfer the token to a specific `recipient` only in that transaction.

##### Spend Payment

```solidity
interface IUniversalTokenRouter {
    function pay(bytes memory payment, uint amount);
}
```

To call `pay`, the `payment` param must be encoded as follows:

```solidity
payment = abi.encode(
    payer,      // address
    recipient,  // address
    eip,        // uint256
    token,      // address
    id          // uint256
);
```

The `payment` bytes can also be used by adapter UTR contracts to pass contexts and payloads for performing custom payment logic.

##### Discard Payment

Sometimes, it's useful to discard the payment instead of performing the transfer, for example, when the application contract wants to burn its own token from `payment.payer`. The following function can be used to verify the payment to the caller's address and discard a portion of it.

```solidity
interface IUniversalTokenRouter {
    function discard(bytes memory payment, uint amount);
}
```

Please refer to the [Discard Payment](#discard-payment-1) section in the **Security Considerations** for an important security note.

##### Payment Lifetime

Payments are recorded in the UTR storage and intended to be spent by `input.action` external calls only within that transaction. All payment storages MUST be cleared before the `UTR.exec` ends.

### Native Token Tranfer

The `UTR` SHOULD have a `receive()` function for user execution logic that requires transferring ETH in. The `msg.value` transferred into the router can be spent in multiple inputs across different actions. While the caller takes full responsibility for the movement of `ETH` in and out of the router, the `exec` function SHOULD refund any remaining `ETH` before the function ends.

Please refer to the [Reentrancy](#reentrancy) section in the **Security Considerations** for information on reentrancy risks and mitigation.

### Usage Examples

#### Uniswap V2 Router

Legacy function:

```solidity
UniswapV2Router01.swapExactTokensForTokens(
    uint amountIn,
    uint amountOutMin,
    address[] calldata path,
    address to,
    uint deadline
)
```

`UniswapV2Helper01.swapExactTokensForTokens` is a modified version of it without the token transfer part.

This transaction is signed by users to execute the swap instead of the legacy function:

```javascript
UniversalTokenRouter.exec([{
    recipient: to,
    eip: 20,
    token: path[path.length-1],
    id: 0,
    amountOutMin,
}], [{
    inputs: [{
        mode: TRANSFER,
        recipient: UniswapV2Library.pairFor(factory, path[0], path[1]),
        eip: 20,
        token: path[0],
        id: 0,
        amountIn: amountIn,
    }],
    code: UniswapV2Helper01.address,
    data: encodeFunctionData("swapExactTokensForTokens", [
        amountIn,
        amountOutMin,
        path,
        to,
        deadline,
    ]),
}])
```

#### Uniswap V3 Router

Legacy router contract:

```solidity
contract SwapRouter {
    // this function is called by pool to pay the input tokens
    function pay(
        address token,
        address payer,
        address recipient,
        uint256 value
    ) internal {
        ...
        // pull payment
        TransferHelper.safeTransferFrom(token, payer, recipient, value);
    }
}
```

The helper contract to use with the `UTR`:

```solidity
contract SwapHelper {
    // this function is called by pool to pay the input tokens
    function pay(
        address token,
        address payer,
        address recipient,
        uint256 value
    ) internal {
        ...
        // pull payment
        bytes memory payment = abi.encode(payer, recipient, 20, token, 0);
        UTR.pay(payment, value);
    }
}
```

This transaction is signed by users to execute the `exactInput` functionality using `PAYMENT` mode:

```javascript
UniversalTokenRouter.exec([{
    eip: 20,
    token: tokenOut,
    id: 0,
    amountOutMin: 1,
    recipient: to,
}], [{
    inputs: [{
        mode: PAYMENT,
        eip: 20,
        token: tokenIn,
        id: 0,
        amountIn: amountIn,
        recipient: pool.address,
    }],
    code: SwapHelper.address,
    data: encodeFunctionData("exactInput", [...]),
}])
```

#### Allowance Adapter

A simple non-reentrancy ERC-20 adapter for aplication and router contracts that use direct allowance.

```solidity
contract AllowanceAdapter is ReentrancyGuard {
    struct Input {
        address token;
        uint amountIn;
    }

    function approveAndCall(
        Input[] memory inputs,
        address spender,
        bytes memory data,
        address leftOverRecipient
    ) external payable nonReentrant {
        for (uint i = 0; i < inputs.length; ++i) {
            Input memory input = inputs[i];
            IERC20(input.token).approve(spender, input.amountIn);
        }

        (bool success, bytes memory result) = spender.call{value: msg.value}(data);
        if (!success) {
            assembly {
                revert(add(result, 32), mload(result))
            }
        }

        for (uint i = 0; i < inputs.length; ++i) {
            Input memory input = inputs[i];
            // clear all allowance
            IERC20(input.token).approve(spender, 0);
            uint leftOver = IERC20(input.token).balanceOf(address(this));
            if (leftOver > 0) {
                TransferHelper.safeTransfer(input.token, leftOverRecipient, leftOver);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

This transaction is constructed to utilize the `UTR` to interact with Uniswap V2 Router without approving any token to it:

```javascript
const { data: routerData } = await uniswapRouter.populateTransaction.swapExactTokensForTokens(
    amountIn,
    amountOutMin,
    path,
    to,
    deadline,
)

const { data: adapterData } = await adapter.populateTransaction.approveAndCall(
    [{
        token: path[0],
        amountIn,
    }],
    uniswapRouter.address,
    routerData,
    leftOverRecipient,
)

await utr.exec([], [{
    inputs: [{
        mode: TRANSFER,
        recipient: adapter.address,
        eip: 20,
        token: path[0],
        id: 0,
        amountIn,
    }],
    code: adapter.address,
    data: adapterData,
}])
```

## Rationale

The `Permit` type signature is not supported since the purpose of the Universal Token Router is to eliminate all interactive `approve` signatures for new tokens, and *most* for old tokens.

## Backwards Compatibility

### Tokens

Old token contracts (ERC-20, ERC-721 and ERC-1155) require approval for the Universal Token Router once for each account.

New token contracts can pre-configure the Universal Token Router as a trusted spender, and no approval transaction is required for interactive usage.

### Applications

The only application contracts **INCOMPATIBLE** with the UTR are contracts that use `msg.sender` as the beneficiary address in their internal storage without any function for ownership transfer.

All application contracts that accept `recipient` (or `to`) argument as the beneficiary address are compatible with the UTR out of the box.

Application contracts that transfer tokens (ERC-20, ERC-721, and ERC-1155) to `msg.sender` need additional adapters to add a `recipient` to their functions.

```solidity
// sample adapter contract for WETH
contract WethAdapter {
    function deposit(address recipient) external payable {
        IWETH(WETH).deposit(){value: msg.value};
        TransferHelper.safeTransfer(WETH, recipient, msg.value);
    }
}
```

Additional helper and adapter contracts might be needed, but they're mostly peripheral and non-intrusive. They don't hold any tokens or allowances, so they can be frequently updated and have little to no security impact on the core application contracts.

## Reference Implementation

A reference implementation by Derivable Labs, verified by Hacken.

```solidity
contract UniversalTokenRouter is ERC165, IUniversalTokenRouter {
    uint256 constant PAYMENT       = 0;
    uint256 constant TRANSFER      = 1;
    uint256 constant CALL_VALUE    = 2;

    uint256 constant EIP_ETH       = 0;

    uint256 constant ERC_721_BALANCE = uint256(keccak256('UniversalTokenRouter.ERC_721_BALANCE'));

    // transient pending payments
    mapping(bytes32 => uint256) t_payments;

    // accepting ETH for user execution (e.g. WETH.withdraw)
    receive() external payable {}

    function exec(
        Output[] memory outputs,
        Action[] memory actions
    ) external payable virtual override {
    unchecked {
        // track the expected balances before any action is executed
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < outputs.length; ++i) {
            Output memory output = outputs[i];
            uint256 balance = _balanceOf(output);
            uint256 expected = output.amountOutMin + balance;
            require(expected >= balance, 'UniversalTokenRouter: OUTPUT_BALANCE_OVERFLOW');
            output.amountOutMin = expected;
        }

        address sender = msg.sender;

        for (uint256 i = 0; i < actions.length; ++i) {
            Action memory action = actions[i];
            uint256 value;
            for (uint256 j = 0; j < action.inputs.length; ++j) {
                Input memory input = action.inputs[j];
                uint256 mode = input.mode;
                if (mode == CALL_VALUE) {
                    // eip and id are ignored
                    value = input.amountIn;
                } else {
                    if (mode == PAYMENT) {
                        bytes32 key = keccak256(abi.encode(sender, input.recipient, input.eip, input.token, input.id));
                        t_payments[key] = input.amountIn;
                    } else if (mode == TRANSFER) {
                        _transferToken(sender, input.recipient, input.eip, input.token, input.id, input.amountIn);
                    } else {
                        revert('UniversalTokenRouter: INVALID_MODE');
                    }
                }
            }
            if (action.data.length > 0) {
                (bool success, bytes memory result) = action.code.call{value: value}(action.data);
                if (!success) {
                    assembly {
                        revert(add(result,32),mload(result))
                    }
                }
            }
            // clear all transient storages, allowances and left-overs
            for (uint256 j = 0; j < action.inputs.length; ++j) {
                Input memory input = action.inputs[j];
                if (input.mode == PAYMENT) {
                    // transient storages
                    bytes32 key = keccak256(abi.encodePacked(sender, input.recipient, input.eip, input.token, input.id));
                    delete t_payments[key];
                }
            }
        }

        // refund any left-over ETH
        uint256 leftOver = address(this).balance;
        if (leftOver > 0) {
            TransferHelper.safeTransferETH(sender, leftOver);
        }

        // verify balance changes
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < outputs.length; ++i) {
            Output memory output = outputs[i];
            uint256 balance = _balanceOf(output);
            // NOTE: output.amountOutMin is reused as `expected`
            require(balance >= output.amountOutMin, 'UniversalTokenRouter: INSUFFICIENT_OUTPUT_AMOUNT');
        }
    } }
    
    function pay(bytes memory payment, uint256 amount) external virtual override {
        discard(payment, amount);
        (
            address sender,
            address recipient,
            uint256 eip,
            address token,
            uint256 id
        ) = abi.decode(payment, (address, address, uint256, address, uint256));
        _transferToken(sender, recipient, eip, token, id, amount);
    }

    function discard(bytes memory payment, uint256 amount) public virtual override {
        bytes32 key = keccak256(payment);
        require(t_payments[key] >= amount, 'UniversalTokenRouter: INSUFFICIENT_PAYMENT');
        unchecked {
            t_payments[key] -= amount;
        }
    }

    // IERC165-supportsInterface
    function supportsInterface(bytes4 interfaceId) public view virtual override(ERC165, IERC165) returns (bool) {
        return
            interfaceId == type(IUniversalTokenRouter).interfaceId ||
            super.supportsInterface(interfaceId);
    }

    function _transferToken(
        address sender,
        address recipient,
        uint256 eip,
        address token,
        uint256 id,
        uint256 amount
    ) internal virtual {
        if (eip == 20) {
            TransferHelper.safeTransferFrom(token, sender, recipient, amount);
        } else if (eip == 1155) {
            IERC1155(token).safeTransferFrom(sender, recipient, id, amount, "");
        } else if (eip == 721) {
            IERC721(token).safeTransferFrom(sender, recipient, id);
        } else {
            revert("UniversalTokenRouter: INVALID_EIP");
        }
    }

    function _balanceOf(
        Output memory output
    ) internal view virtual returns (uint256 balance) {
        uint256 eip = output.eip;
        if (eip == 20) {
            return IERC20(output.token).balanceOf(output.recipient);
        }
        if (eip == 1155) {
            return IERC1155(output.token).balanceOf(output.recipient, output.id);
        }
        if (eip == 721) {
            if (output.id == ERC_721_BALANCE) {
                return IERC721(output.token).balanceOf(output.recipient);
            }
            try IERC721(output.token).ownerOf(output.id) returns (address currentOwner) {
                return currentOwner == output.recipient ? 1 : 0;
            } catch {
                return 0;
            }
        }
        if (eip == EIP_ETH) {
            return output.recipient.balance;
        }
        revert("UniversalTokenRouter: INVALID_EIP");
    }
}
```

## Security Considerations

### Reentrancy

Tokens transferred to the UTR contract will be permanently lost, as there is no way to transfer them out. Applications that require an intermediate address to hold tokens should use their own Helper contract with a reentrancy guard for secure execution.

ETH must be transferred to the UTR contracts before the value is spent in an action call (using `CALL_VALUE`). This ETH value can be siphoned out of the UTR using a re-entrant call inside an action code or rogue token functions. This exploit will not be possible if users don't transfer more ETH than they will spend in that transaction.

```solidity
// transfer 100 in, but spend only 60,
// so at most 40 wei can be exploited in this transaction
UniversalTokenRouter.exec([
    ...
], [{
    inputs: [{
        mode: CALL_VALUE,
        eip: 20,
        token: 0,
        id: 0,
        amountIn: 60,   // spend 60
        recipient: AddressZero,
    }],
    ...
}], {
    value: 100,   // transfer 100 in
})
```

### Discard Payment

The result of the `pay` function can be checked by querying the balance after the call, allowing the UTR contract to be called in a trustless manner. However, due to the inability to verify the execution of the `discard` function, it should only be used with a trusted UTR contract.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
