---
eip: 1023
title: PoS blockhash backward compatibility
author: Beether
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2018-01-01
---


## Simple Summary
In PoS, each block's `blockhash` changes from being an economically staked random number to being a value determined by a particular validator with only computational constraints (eg: not `0x0`). Thus, the assumptions of when and how to use `blockhash` will change from PoW to PoS. What was _tolerable_ or _benign_ before, is now potentially _catastrophic_.

In short, there is a signficant difference between `Miners can manipulate the blockhash if there is a financial gain to be made.` and `Miners can manipulate the blockhash.`


To preserve compatibility and expectations of `blockhash` from PoW to PoS, this EIP advises replacing PoS's `blockhash` with a similarly economically staked value; or, at the very least, exposing a new value named `block.entropyhash`.

## Abstract
In PoW, the `blockhash` is not knowable by a miner before first successfully hashing the block, which carries an economic cost. In this sense `blockhash` is used by contracts as a randomly distributed number under the assumption there must be some **_minimum_ economic incentive** required to exploit it.

In PoS, the `blockhash` is not a source of entropy at all; a validator can submit a block whose `blockhash` results in any desired outcomes, with _zero_ cost. In this sense, `blockhash` can now be exploited by validators provided there is **_any_ economic incentive.**

In PoW, the economic incentive to coerce `blockhash` had to be about `block reward - uncle reward`, in PoS, it merely needs to be `>0`. 

Some example cases in PoW that are now vulnerable in PoS:

 - Using `blockhash`, or any derivation of it, as a randomly distributed number for benign purposes; eg, distributing items into buckets.
 - Using `blockhash`, or any derivation of it, to determine outcomes that had a very small amount of Ether associated with it.

## Motivation
There are three main motivations for providing an economically staked randomly distributed number:

 - Preserve backward compatibility with PoW, which does provide such a number in the form of `blockhash`
 - Prevent validators from wreaking havoc on anything that currently uses `blockhash` in any form.
 - Provide a sanctioned value with clear specifications about when and how it can be used.

A fourth reason is that providing a built-in source of randomness is a _very_ nice feature for contract developers. As long as the limitations of the use of this random number are made clear, it's a massive savings in effort as compared to using other random number systems (oracles, multiple signatures, etc). Furthermore, it provides a easier route to autonomy for contracts that _do_ require randomness -- all other random number schemes require an additional transaction to be executed, and depend on complex behavior. It would be very nice to have a random number provided by the blockchain itself, even if it did carry limitations. (Again, this exists in PoW already in the form of `blockhash`)

## Specification
Let `entropyhash` for a particuar `blockheight` be a value unknown to any validator before their block and vote are cast. This ensures a validator has to commit to their _possibly-malicious-transactions_ before knowing what the results will be.

I'm not a PoS expert, so I don't know how exactly to generate `entropyhash`, but it seems that hashing `data-used-to-pick-winning-validator` is what we're after. No validator shoud know this ahead of time, and the result of this value should have an economic stake behind it.

Next, do either:

 1) take the winning block and replace the value of `blockhash` with `entropyhash`.
 
 2) If (1) is infeasible or inadvisible, append an additional field to the block called `entropyhash`, and make it available in the EVM to contracts.

## Rationale
The economically staked random number, which in PoW is `blockhash`, should be made available in PoS as well. Whether or not it should replace `blockhash` or be a new field is beyond my expertise.

## Backwards Compatibility


## Test Cases


## Implementation


## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
