---
eip: 3475
title: Multiple Callable Bonds Standard
description: An interface for contracts that manage multiple bonds, allowing multiple LP token contracts to store more information.
author: Yu LIU (@yuliu-debond), Waroon D. (@dr-chain), Cedric Ngakam (@drikssy), Dhruv Malik (@GrandGarcon), Samuel Gwlanold (@Edoumou), Toufic Batrice (@toufic0710)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-3475-multiple-callable-bonds-standard/8691
status: Last Call
last-call-deadline: 2022-07-30.
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2021-04-05
---


## Abstract

This API standard allows for the creation of any number of bond types in a single contract. Existing LP token standards like [EIP-20](./eip-20.md) require the deployment of separate factories and token contracts per token type. Issuing bonds with multiple redemption data cannot be achieved with existing token standards. This proposal allows each bond class ID to represent a new configurable token type and for each bond nonce to represent an issuing date or any other form of data in uint256. Every single nonce of a bond class can have its own metadata, supply, and other redemption conditions.

## Motivation

Current LP tokens are simple ERC-20 tokens with no complex data structure. To allow more complex reward and redemption logic to be built, we need a new LP token standard that can manage multiple bonds, store more metadata for individual evaluation of bond operations, and be gas efficient. This proposal allows any token on a solidity-compatible EVM blockchain to create its own bond. These bonds with the same interface standard can be exchanged on secondary markets. It will enable any 3rd party wallet applications or exchanges to read the balance and the redemption conditions of these tokens irrespective of the geographical/financial markets where they are traded worldwide. ERC-3475 bonds can also be batched as tradeable instruments. Those instruments can then be divided and exchanged in secondary markets.

The functions defined in this EIP provide a gas-efficient solution for creating, trading, and burning bonds. The trading and burning of ERC-3475 Bonds will also increase the token market cap, helping it recover from the recession period. Existing structures, such as AMM exchanges or lending platforms, can be updated to recognize bonds created by this standard.

These bonds can also be batch called for issuance and, in turn, be divided and exchanged in a secondary market. The defined functions in this standard do operations on the serialized array, rather than storing them in struct mappings, giving significant benefits in storage and query gas costs. Trading and burning of these bonds will maintain market stability and adoption by:

-Providing more composability for building on other DeFi derivative products. 
-Maintaining the token market cap based on the variation of market forces, helping it recover from the recession period. Existing structures, such as AMM exchanges or lending platforms, can be updated to recognize ERC-3475 Bonds.


## Specification

**definitions**

- Bank: an entity that issues, redeems, or burns bonds after getting the necessary amount of liquidity. Generally, a single entity with access to the pool.


**TransferFrom**

`transferFrom(address _from, address _to, TRANSACTION[] calldata  _transaction)` allows the transfer of any number of bond types from an address to another.

The `"_from"` argument is the address of the holder whose balance about to decrees.

The `"_to"` argument is the address of the recipient whose balance is about to increased.

The `"_transaction"` is the "`TRANSACTION[] calldata"`  structure defined in the rationales.

@dev transferFrom MUST have the `isApprovedFor(_from, _to, _transaction[i].classId)` approval to transfer `_from` address to `_to` address for given classId (for all transaction in the array structure).

e.g.

``` solidity
function transferFrom(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef, 0x82a55a613429Aeb3D01fbE6841bE1AcA4fFD5b2B, [{1, 42, 500000000}]);
```

transfer from `_from` address, to `_to` address,  `500000000` bonds  of  type class`1` and  nonce `42`.


**transferAllowanceFrom** 

`function transferAllowanceFrom(address _from,address _to, TRANSACTION[] calldata _transactions) public virtual override`

allows the transfer of only those bonds types and nonces which are being alloted to the _to address using allowance() function. 

The `"_from"` argument is the address of the holder whose balance about to decreased.

The `"_to"` argument is the address of the recipient whose balance is about to increased.

The `"_transaction"` is the "`TRANSACTION[] calldata"`  structure defined in the rationales.

@dev transferAllowanceFrom MUST have the `allowance(_from, msg.sender, _transactions[i].classId, _transactions[i].nonceId)` implemented inside (where `i` looping for all the transaction index) 



**Issue**

`issue(address _to, TRANSACTION[] calldata _transaction)` allows issuing any number of bond types to an address.

The calling of this function needs to be restricted to bond issuer contracts.


The `_to` argument is the address to which the bond will be issued.


The `_transaction` is the `TRANSACTION[] calldata` structure defined in the upcoming section rationale.

@dev It MUST be issued by a single entity (for instance, a role-based ownable contract that has integration with the liquidity pool of the deposited collateral by _to address).

e.g.

```solidity
issueBond(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef,[{0,5,1000}]);
```

issues `1000` bonds with a class of `0` to address `0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef` with a nonce of `5`.

**Redeem**

`redeem(address _from, TRANSACTION[] calldata _transaction)` redemption of bond from an address.

The calling of this function needs to be restricted to the bond issuer contract.

The `_from` is the address from which the bond will be redeemed.

The `_transaction` is the `TRANSACTION[] calldata`  structure defined in the rationale.

@dev redeem function for a given class, and nonce category MUST BE done only after certain conditions for maturity (can be end time, total active liquidity, etc) are met. Furthermore, it SHOULD ONLY be called by the bank or secondary market maker contract.

e.g.

```Solidity
redeem(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef,[{1,42,500000000}]);
```
 means “redeem from wallet address(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef), 500000000 of bond class1 and nonce 42


**Burn**

`burn(address _from, TRANSACTION[] calldata _transaction)` allows the transfer of any number of bond types from one address to another.

The`"_from"` argument is the address of the holder whose balance is about to decrease.

The `" _transaction"` is the "`TRANSACTION[] calldata"` structure defined in the rationales.

@dev burn function for given class and nonce MUST BE called by only the controller contract.

``` Solidity
 burnBond(0x82a55a613429Aeb3D01fbE6841bE1AcA4fFD5b2B,[{1,42,500000000}]);
```
means burning 500000000 bonds of class 1 nonce 42 owned by address 0x82a55a613429Aeb3D01fbE6841bE1AcA4fFD5b2B.

**Approve**

`approve(address _spender, TRANSACTION[] calldata _transaction)`

 Allows `_spender` to withdraw from the msg.sender the bonds of `_amount` and type (classId and nonceId).

If this function is called again, it overwrites the current allowance with the amount.

The`"_spender"` is the address the caller approves for his bonds defined by classId and nonceId

The `" _transaction"` is the "`TRANSACTION[] calldata"`  structure defined in the rationales.

e.g.

```Solidity
approve(0x82a55a613429Aeb3D01fbE6841bE1AcA4fFD5b2B,[{0,1,30000}]);
```
means owner of address 0x82a55a613429Aeb3D01fbE6841bE1AcA4fFD5b2B is approved to manage 30000 bonds from class 0 and Nonce 1

**SetApprovalFor**

`setApprovalFor(address _operator, bool _approved)` Enable or disable approval for a third party ("operator") to manage all the  Bonds in the given class of the caller's bonds.

The`"_operator"` is the address to add to the set of authorized operators.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"_approved"` is true if the operator is approved, false to revoke approval.

e.g.

```Solidity
setApprovalFor(0x82a55a613429Aeb3D01fbE6841bE1AcA4fFD5b2B,0,true);
```
means that address 0x82a55a613429Aeb3D01fbE6841bE1AcA4fFD5b2B is authorized to transfer bonds from class 0 (across all nonces).


**TotalSupply**

`totalSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to read the total supply of a given bond's class and nonce. Here total-supply includes burned and redeemed supply.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce id of the given bond class. 

Returns the total supply of the bond in question. — e.g. `"5821200000000"`.

```Solidity
function totalSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId) external view returns (uint256);
```

**ActiveSupply**

`activeSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to read the non-burned and non-redeemed supply of a given class type and bond nonce.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce id of the given bond class. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

Returns the active supply of the bond in question. — e.g. `"5821200000000"`.

``` Solidity
function activeSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId) external view returns (uint256);
```

**BurnedSupply**

`function burnedSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to read the burned supply of a given class and bond nonce.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce id of the given bond class. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

Returns the active supply of the bond in question. — e.g. `"612300000000"`.

```Solidity
function burnedSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId) external view returns (uint256);
```

**RedeemedSupply**

`redeemedSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to read the redeemed supply of a given class and bond nonce.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce id of the given bond class. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

Returns the redeemed supply of the bond in question. — e.g. `"612300000000"`.

```Solidity
function redeemedSupply(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId) external view returns (uint256);
```

**BalanceOf**

`balanceOf(address _account, uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to read the remaining balance of an address holding the bond with (classId,nonceId). This function will only return the balance of a single bond class and bond class nonce.


The `"_account"` is the address of the token holder.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce id of the given bond class. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

@returns the balance of the giving bond class and nonce id. — e.g. `"571300000000"`.

```Solidity
function balanceOf(address _account, uint256 classID, uint256 nonceId) external view returns (uint256);
```

**ClassValues**

`classValues(uint256 classId)` allows anyone to read the values (stored in struct METADATA for different bondNonces) for given bond class `classId`.

The `"classId"` is the class id of bond.

Returns an array of uint256 values of a bond class. — e.g. `[4,...]`. 

**NOTE: The metadata SHOULD follow a set of structure explained later in this document.**

```
function classValues(uint256 classId) external view returns (uint256[] memory);
```

**ClassMetadata**

`function classMetadata(uint classId)` allows anyone to read the JSON metadata of a class id given.

Returns the JSON metadata of the classes. The metadata SHOULD follow a set of structures explained later in this document.

``` Solidity
function classMetadata(uint classId) external view returns (METADATA[] memory);
```

**NonceValues**

`nonceValues(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to read the values of a bond nonce.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce id of the given bond class. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

Returns an array of uint256 values of a bond nonce. — e.g. `[1615584000,...]`. **NOTE: The metadata SHOULD follow a set of structures explained later in this document .**

``` Solidity
function nonceValues(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId) external view returns (uint256[] memory);
```

**NonceMetadata**

`nonceMetadata(uint256 classId)` allows anyone to read the metadata of a nonce id of a class id given.

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

Returns the JSON metadata of the classes. The metadata SHOULD follow a set of structures explained later in this document.

```Solidity
function nonceMetadata(uint256 classId) external view returns (METADATA[] memory);
```

**IsRedeemable()**

`isRedeemable(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to check if a bond is redeemable.

**NOTE:the conditions of redemption can be specified with one or several internal functions.**

The `"classId"` is the class nonce of bond, the first bond class created will be 0, and so on.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce of the bond. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

@returns bool `"true"` if the cited bond is redeemable. And `"false"` it's not.

```Solidity
function bondIsRedeemable(uint256 class, uint256 nonce) external view returns (bool);
```

**getProgress**

`getProgress(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)` allows anyone to check the progress needed to redeem the bond.\

**NOTE: the conditions of redemption can be defined with one or several internal functions.**

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

The `"nonceId"` is the nonce id of the given bond class. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

Returns `"progressAchieved"` and `"progressRemaining"` of the cited bond. 

```Solidity
function getProgress(uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId)  external  view  returns  (uint256 progressAchieved, uint256 progressRemaining);
```

**allowance**

`function allowance(address _owner, address _spender, uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId, uint _amount) external view returns (uint256)` 

Authorises to set the allowance and also to return the same for given class classId and nonceId Iff the address ("_operator") is approved to manage account's Bonds class.

The"_owner" The owner of the tokens

The"_operator" Address of the authorized operator

The "classId" is the class id of the bond.

Returns the "_amount" which spender is still allowed to withdraw from "_owner".

```Solidity
function allowance(address _owner, address _spender, uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId) external view returns (uint256);
````

**isApprovedFor**

`function isApprovedFor(address _owner, address _operator, uint256 classId)` returns if address ("_operator") is approved for managing account's bonds class.

The`"_owner"` The owner of the tokens

The`"_operator"` address of the authorized operator

The `"classId"` is the class id of the bond.

Returns `"true"` if the operator is approved, `"false"` if not

```Solidity
function isApprovedFor(address owner, address operator, uint256 classId) external view returns (bool);
```

### Metadata: 
The metadata of a bond class or nonce is stored as an array of JSON objects, represented  by following types. 
**NOTE: all of the metadata schemas are referenced from [here](https://github.com/Debond-Protocol/EIP-3475/blob/main/EIPS/metadata.md#metadata--standards)**

### 1. Description :
This defines the additional information about the nature of data being stored in the nonce/class metadata structures. They are defined using the structured explained [here](https://github.com/Debond-Protocol/EIP-3475/blob/main/EIPS/metadata.md#1-description-metadata). this will then be used by the frontend of the respective entities participating in the bond markets to interpret the data which is compliant to their jurisdiction. 


### 2. Nonce:

This defines the actual data defining the state/ nature and quantity of the bonds for the given class and nonce identifier of the bond. reference structure are presented [here](https://github.com/Debond-Protocol/EIP-3475/blob/main/EIPS/metadata.md#2-Nonce-information).

The key value for indexing the information is the 'class'' field. following are the rules : 

- The title can be any alpha numeric type that is differentiated by the description of metadata (although it can dependent on certain jurisdictions).
- The title SHOULD not be  EMPTY.

Some specific examples of metadata can be localization of bonds, jurisdiction details etc, and they can be found in the link shared above. 

### 3. Class metadata:

This structure defines the details of the class information (symbol, risk information, etc.). the example is explained [here](https://github.com/Debond-Protocol/EIP-3475/blob/main/EIPS/metadata.md#3-class-information). 


## Decoding the data:

First the functions for analyzing the metadata (i.e `ClassMetadata` and `NonceMetadata`) are to be used by corresponding front-ends to decode the information about the bond. 

this is done via overriding the function interface for functions `classValues` and `nonceValues` by defining the key (which SHOULD be a index) to read the corresponding information stored as JSON object. 

```JSON
    {
"title": "symbol",
"type": "str",
"description": "Lorem ipsum..."
"value": ["Class Name 1","Class Name 2","DBIT Fix 6M"],
}
```

e.g. in the above example, to get the `“symbol"` of the given class id, we can use the class id as key to get the `“symbol"` value in the JSON metadata `"symbol 3"`, which then can be used for fetching the detail for instance. 


### EVENT


### 1. Issue
`"Issue"` MUST trigger when Bonds are issued. This SHOULD not include zero value Issuing.


```
event Issue(address indexed _operator, address indexed _to, TRANSACTION[] _transaction); 
```

e.g. 

```Solidity
emit Issue(_operator, 0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef,{'0','14','500'}); 

```

issue by address(operator) 500 DBIT-USD Bond(Nonce14,class 0) to address 0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef


**NOTE**

`"Issue"` MUST be triggered when the operator (i.e Bank address) contract issues bonds to the given entity.
 
### 2. Redeem


```Solidity
event Redeem(address indexed _operator, address indexed _from, uint256 classId, uint256 nonceId, uint256 _amount);
```

e.g.

```Solidity
emit Redeem(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef,0x492Af743654549b12b1B807a9E0e8F397E44236E,{1,14,500});
```

5000 bonds of class 1, nonce 14 owned by address 0x492Af743654549b12b1B807a9E0e8F397E44236E are being redeemed by 0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef.

**NOTE**

NOTE:`"Redeem"` MUST trigger when Bonds are redeemed. This SHOULD not include zero value redemption.


### 3. Burn:


```Solidity
event Burn(address indexed _operator, address indexed _from, TRANSACTION[] _transaction)
```
e.g.

```Solidity
emit Burn(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef,0x492Af743654549b12b1B807a9E0e8F397E44236E,{1,14,500});
```

5000 bonds of owner 0x492Af743654549b12b1B807a9E0e8F397E44236E of type (class 1, nonce 14) are burned by operator 0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef.


**NOTE**

- `"Burn"`MUST trigger when the bonds are being redeemed via staking (or being invalidated) by the bank contract.
- `"Burn"` MUST trigger when Bonds are burned. This SHOULD not include zero value burning.


### 4.Transfer:

```Solidity
event Transfer(address indexed _operator, address indexed _from, address indexed _to, TRANSACTION[] _transaction);
```
e.g.

```Solidity
emit Transfer(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef, 0x492Af743654549b12b1B807a9E0e8F397E44236E, address _to, {1,4,500});
```

transfer by address(_operator) amount 500 DBIT-USD bonds with (Class 1 and Nonce 14) from 0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef, to address(_to)".

**NOTE**

-`"Transfer"` MUST trigger when Bonds are transferred. This SHOULD not include zero value transfers.

-`"Transfer"` event with the `_from` `0x0` MUST not create this event(use `"event Issued"` instead). 

- Transfer event with the `_to` `0x0` MUST not create this event(use`"event Redeemed"` when redemption, and `"event Burned"` when burning).

### 5.Approval:

```Solidity
event ApprovalFor(address indexed _owner, address indexed _operator, bool _approved);
```
e.g.

```Solidity
emit ApprovalFor(0x2d03B6C79B75eE7aB35298878D05fe36DC1fE8Ef, 0x492Af743654549b12b1B807a9E0e8F397E44236E);
```

address(_owner) gives approval to address(_operator) to transfer his bonds.

**NOTE**

`"Approval"` MUST trigger when bond holders are giving approval to an opreator. This SHOULD not include zero value approval. 

`"Approval"` MUST trigger when bond-holders are giving approval to an operator. This SHOULD not include zero value approval. 

## Rationale

**Metadata structure**: Instead of utilizing a mapping from address, the bond's metadata like the time of redemption, redemption conditions, and interest rate can be stored in the bond class and nonce structures. Classes represent the different bond types, and nonces represent the various period of issuances. Nonces under the same class share the same metadata. Meanwhile, nonces are non-fungible. Each nonce can store a different set of metadata. Thus, upon transfer of a bond, all the metadata will be transferred to the new owner of the bond.

```solidity
    struct METADATA {
        string title;
        string types;
        string description;
        string[] values;
    }
```
**Batch function:**

 ERC 3475 supports batch operations such as batch transaction. It allows the user to transfer different bonds along with their metadata to a new address instantaneously in a single txn. This mechanism helps in the "packaging" of bonds which is helpful in use cases like trades on a secondary market. And after execution, the new owner holds the right to reclaim the face value of each of the bonds.

```solidity
    struct TRANSACTION {
        uint256 classId;
        uint256 nonceId;
        uint256 _amount;
    }
```
Where
The "classId" is the class id of the bond.

The "nonceId" is the nonce id of the given bond class. This param is for distinctions of the issuing conditions of the bond.

The "_amount" is the amount of the bond that the spender is approved for.

**AMM optimization**: One of the most obvious use cases of ERC 3475 is the multilayered pool. The early version of AMM uses a separate smart contract and an ERC 20 LP token to manage a pair. By doing so, the overall liquidity inside of one pool is significantly reduced and thus generates unnecessary gas spent and slippage. Using ERC 3475, one can build a big liquidity pool with all the pairs inside (thanks to the presence of the data structures consisting of the liquidity corresponding to the given class and nonce of bonds). Thus by knowing class and nonce of the bonds, the liquidity can be represented as the percentage of a given token pair for the owner of the bond in the given pool. Effectively, the ERC20 LP token (defined by unique smart contract in the pool factory contract) is converted, in this case, to ERC 3475 (Multiple Callable Bonds) token, which is consolidated into a single pool.


## Backwards Compatibility

ERC-3475 contract is compatible with contracts that inherit the ERC-3475 interface. Its valid for both the issuer and receiver of the bonds, the client EOA needs the IERC3475 interface.

However, any existing ERC-20 token contract can issue their ERC-3475 bond by delegating the minting role to a bank contract with the ERC-3475 interface built-in. The implementation of the interface can be found in our reference implementation.

To ensure the reading of transactions, `"Issue"`,`"Redeem"`,`"Burn"`,`"Transfer"`, Events cited above MUST be emitted when such transaction is passed. 

***Note that the ERC 3475 interface is also compatible with ERC-20 and [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) interface.*** 
But the creation of a separated bank contract is recommended for reading and future upgrade needs.


Acceptable collateral can be in the form of [EIP-20](./eip-20.md) tokens, [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) tokens, or other bonds.
. Bond can now represent a collection of collaterals in an ERC-20 token, ERC-721 non-fungible token, and ERC-3475 Multiple callable bonds...

## Reference Implementation

[ERC-3475 Reference Interface](https://github.com/Debond-Protocol/EIP-3475/blob/main/contracts/IERC3475.sol),

[ERC3475 example implementation](https://github.com/Debond-Protocol/EIP-3475).

[Debond-ERC3475 implementation](https://github.com/Debond-Protocol/Debond-ERC3475/blob/main/contracts/DebondERC3475.sol).


**This demonstration shows only basic ERC-3475 bonds reference implementation. Developers can build much-sophisticated logic (like fixed/floating rate bonds) with this interface, and the Debond-ERC3475 gives a reference example**

## Security Considerations

There are no known security considerations for this EIP.
## Copyright Waiver
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
