---
eip: 2341
title: "Hardfork Meta: Kunming"
author: Wei Tang (@sorpaas)
discussions-to: https://github.com/sorpaas/EIPs/issues/9
type: Meta
status: Draft
created: 2019-11-01
---

### Simple Summary

This protocol upgrade provides a backward compatibility foundation to
enable future protocol upgrades to be applied with significantly lower
chance of breaking existing contracts.

### Abstract

This document proposes the following blocks at which to implement the
changes specified in "Specification" section.

- Undecided on Ethereum PoW-mainnet.

### Specification

At hard fork block, enable [EIP-1702](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1702):

* Define the previous EVM version as version `0`.
* Define a new version `1`, with the following EVM modifications
  applied on it.
  * **[39-UNGAS](https://specs.that.world/39-ungas/)**: Remove all
    observable behavior of gas cost in EVM and change out-of-gas
    exception to trap the whole transaction.
  * **[40-UNUSED](https://specs.that.world/40-unused/)**: Disable
    deployment of unused opcodes.
  
### Discussion

#### Feature Upgrades

Once the hard fork is enabled, future feature upgrades can be applied
directly on version `1`, without the need to define additional new
versions. This simplifies client maintenance, which was one of the
main resistance to apply EIP-1702 in Istanbul.

Any gas cost changes can be applied without worry about backward
compatibility issues, because gas cost is now an unobservable behavior
in EVM. Any addition of opcodes can be applied without worry about
backward compatibility issues, because deployment of unused opcode is
disabled. This nearly covers all EVM upgrade paths we need to care
about.

#### Ecosystem

It is possible to deploy a helper contract to allow version `0`
contracts continue to be created. This allows unmodified Solidity code
to be deployed, just like what we have now.

However, for version `1`, because we made several changes related to
gas cost, which impacts the semantics of certain opcodes such as
`CALL*` and `CREATE*`, Solidity compiler must be modified to support
version `1`.

Existing common practices might need to change as well. Some practices
relies on the observable behavior of gas cost. Relying on gas cost is
usually considered to be a bad practice because gas cost can and will
change.

On the other hand, version `1` enables some new practices that wasn't
possible before. For example, a contract can now refuse to be invoked
by any other contracts.

#### Emergency Hard Fork

Our current gas cost scheme might contain DoS attack vectors. If those
attack vectors must be fixed by changing existing gas cost schemes,
then it must change gas costs specified in version `0`. In those
emergency hard fork scenarios, we will inevitably break backward
compatibility.

## License

This work is licensed under [Apache License, Version
2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/).
