---
eip: 7495
title: SSZ StableContainer
description: New SSZ type to represent a flexible container with stable serialization and merkleization
author: Etan Kissling (@etan-status), Cayman (@wemeetagain)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7495-ssz-stablecontainer/15476
status: Review
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-08-18
---

## Abstract

This EIP introduces a new [Simple Serialize (SSZ) type](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md) to represent `StableContainer[N]` values. A `StableContainer[N]` extends an SSZ `Container` with stable serialization and merkleization even when individual fields become optional or new fields are introduced in the future.

Furthermore, `MerkleizeAs[B]` is introduced to support specialized sub-types of `Container` and `StableContainer[N]` while retaining the merkleization of the base type. This is useful, e.g., for fork-specific data structures that only use a subset of the base fields. Verifiers of Merkle proofs for these data structures will not break on new forks.

## Motivation

Stable containers are currently not representable in SSZ. Adding support provides these benefits:

1. **Stable signatures:** Signing roots derived from a `StableContainer[N]` never change. In the context of Ethereum, this is useful for transaction signatures that are expected to remain valid even when future updates introduce additional transaction fields. Likewise, the overall transaction root remains stable and can be used as a perpetual transaction ID.

2. **Stable merkle proofs:** Merkle proof verifiers that check specific fields of a `StableContainer[N]` do not need continuous updating when future updates introduce additional fields. Common fields always merkleize at the same [generalized indices](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/merkle-proofs.md).

3. **Optional fields:** Current SSZ formats do not support optional fields, prompting designs to use zero values instead. With `StableContainer[N]`, the SSZ serialization is compact; inactive fields do not consume space.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Type definition

Similar to the regular [SSZ `Container`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#composite-types), `StableContainer[N]` defines an ordered heterogeneous collection of fields. `N` indicates the potential maximum number of fields to which it can ever grow in the future. `N` MUST be `> 0`.

As part of a `StableContainer[N]`, fields of type `Optional[T]` MAY be defined. Such fields can either represent a present value of SSZ type `T`, or indicate absence of a value (indicated by `None`). The [default value](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#default-values) of an `Optional[T]` is `None`.

```python
class Example(StableContainer[32]):
    a: uint64
    b: Optional[uint32]
    c: uint16
```

For the purpose of serialization, `StableContainer[N]` is always considered ["variable-size"](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#variable-size-and-fixed-size) regardless of the individual field types.

### Stability guarantees

The serialization and merkleization of a `StableContainer[N]` remains stable as long as:

- The maximum capacity `N` does not change
- The order of fields does not change
- New fields are always added to the end
- Required fields remain required `T`, or become an `Optional[T]`
- Optional fields remain `Optional[T]`, or become a required `T`

When an optional field becomes required, existing messages still have stable serialization and merkleization, but will be rejected on deserialization if not present.

### JSON serialization

JSON serialization follows the [canonical JSON mapping](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#json-mapping) of SSZ `Container`.

Fields of type `Optional[T]` with a `None` value SHALL be omitted when serializing to JSON.

### Binary serialization

Serialization of `StableContainer[N]` is defined similarly to the [existing logic](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#vectors-containers-lists) for `Container`. Notable changes are:

- A [`Bitvector[N]`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#composite-types) is constructed, indicating active fields within the `StableContainer[N]`. For required fields `T` and optional fields `Optional[T]` with a present value (not `None`), a `True` bit is included. For optional fields `Optional[T]` with a `None` value, a `False` bit is included. The `Bitvector[N]` is padded with `False` bits up through length `N`
- Only active fields are serialized, i.e., fields with a corresponding `True` bit in the `Bitvector[N]`
- The serialization of the `Bitvector[N]` is prepended to the serialized active fields
- If variable-length fields are serialized, their offsets are relative to the start of serialized active fields, after the `Bitvector[N]`

```python
def is_active_field(element):
    return not is_optional(element) or element is not None

# Determine active fields
active_fields = Bitvector[N](([is_active_field(element) for element in value] + [False] * N)[:N])
active_values = [element for element in value if is_active_field(element)]

# Recursively serialize
fixed_parts = [serialize(element) if not is_variable_size(element) else None for element in active_values]
variable_parts = [serialize(element) if is_variable_size(element) else b"" for element in active_values]

# Compute and check lengths
fixed_lengths = [len(part) if part != None else BYTES_PER_LENGTH_OFFSET for part in fixed_parts]
variable_lengths = [len(part) for part in variable_parts]
assert sum(fixed_lengths + variable_lengths) < 2**(BYTES_PER_LENGTH_OFFSET * BITS_PER_BYTE)

# Interleave offsets of variable-size parts with fixed-size parts
variable_offsets = [serialize(uint32(sum(fixed_lengths + variable_lengths[:i]))) for i in range(len(active_values))]
fixed_parts = [part if part != None else variable_offsets[i] for i, part in enumerate(fixed_parts)]

# Return the concatenation of the active fields `Bitvector` with the active
# fixed-size parts (offsets interleaved) and the active variable-size parts
return serialize(active_fields) + b"".join(fixed_parts + variable_parts)
```

### Deserialization

Deserialization of a `StableContainer[N]` starts by deserializing a `Bitvector[N]`. That value MUST be validated:

- For each required field, the corresponding bit in the `Bitvector[N]` MUST be `True`
- For each optional field, the corresponding bit in the `Bitvector[N]` is not restricted
- All extra bits in the `Bitvector[N]` that exceed the number of fields MUST be `False`

The rest of the data is [deserialized](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#deserialization) same as a regular [SSZ `Container`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#vectors-containers-lists), consulting the `Bitvector[N]` to determine what optional fields are present in the data. Absent fields are skipped during deserialization and assigned `None` values.

### Merkleization

The [merkleization specification](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#merkleization) is extended with the following helper functions:

- `chunk_count(type)`: calculate the amount of leafs for merkleization of the type.
  - `StableContainer[N]`: always `N`, regardless of the actual number of fields in the type definition
- `mix_in_aux`: Given a Merkle root `root` and an auxiliary SSZ object root `aux` return `hash(root + aux)`.

To merkleize a `StableContainer[N]`, a `Bitvector[N]` is constructed, indicating active fields within the `StableContainer[N]`, using the same process as during serialization.

Merkleization `hash_tree_root(value)` of an object `value` is extended with:

- `mix_in_aux(merkleize(([hash_tree_root(element) if is_active_field(element) else Bytes32() for element in value.data] + [Bytes32()] * N)[:N]), hash_tree_root(value.active_fields))` if `value` is a `StableContainer[N]`.

### `MerkleizeAs[B]`

`MerkleizeAs[B]` can be applied to a more specialized sub-type of a base type `B` with SSZ type `Container` or `StableContainer[N]`. The following specializations are allowed:

- Fields in `MerkleizeAs[B]` correspond to a field with the same field name in `B`, but may appear in a different order; this only affects serialization, the canonical order in `B` is always used for merkleization
- For fields of type `T` in the base type `B`, the corresponding fields in `MerkleizeAs[B]` may have type `T` or `MerkleizeAs[T]`; All fields that are required in `B` must be present in `MerkleizeAs[B]`

If base type `B` is a `StableContainer[N]`, additionally, the following specializations are allowed:

- For fields of type `Optional[T]` in the base type `B`, the corresponding fields in `MerkleizeAs[B]` may have type `T` / `MerkleizeAs[T]` (to make them required in the sub-type), or `Optional[T]` / `Optional[MerkleizeAs[T]]` (to keep them optional in the sub-type)
- Fields of type `Optional[T]` in the base type `B` may be absent in `MerkleizeAs[B]` (to disallow their presence in the sub-type)

Serialization of `MerkleizeAs[B]` is based on its own field order, disregarding the order of base type `B`. If base type `B` is a `StableContainer[N]`, the leading `Bitvector` is replaced by a sparse reprsentation that only includes information about optional fields, and also follows the field order in `MerkleizeAs[B]` instead of the order within the base type `B`. Bits for required fields of `MerkleizeAs[B]` as well as the zero-padding to capacity `N` are not included. If there are no optional fields in `MerkleizeAs[B]`, no `Bitvector` is omitted.

Merkleization of `MerkleizeAs[B]` always follows the merkleization of base type `B`.

`MerkleizeAs[B]` is considered ["variable-size"](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#variable-size-and-fixed-size) iff it contains any `Optional[T]` or any "variable-size" fields.

```python
# Defines the common merkleization format and a portable serialization format
class Shape(StableContainer[4]):
    side: Optional[uint16]
    color: uint8
    radius: Optional[uint16]

# Inherits merkleization format from `Shape`, but is serialized more compactly
class Square(MerkleizeAs[Shape]):
    side: uint16
    color: uint8

# Inherits merkleization format from `Shape`, but is serialized more compactly
class Circle(MerkleizeAs[Shape]):
    radius: uint16
    color: uint8

# Defines a container with immutable scheme that contains two `StableContainer`
class ShapePair(Container):
    shape_1: Shape
    shape_2: Shape

# Inherits merkleization format from `ShapePair`, and serializes more compactly
class SquarePair(MerkleizeAs[ShapePair]):
    shape_1: Square
    shape_2: Square

# Inherits merkleization format from `ShapePair`, and reorders fields
class CirclePair(MerkleizeAs[ShapePair]):
    shape_2: Circle
    shape_1: Circle
```

Serialization examples:

- `03420001`

  ```Shape(side=0x42, color=1, radius=None)```

- `420001`

  ```Square(side=0x42, color=1)```

- `06014200`

  ```Shape(side=None, color=1, radius=0x42)```

- `420001`

  ```Circle(radius=0x42, color=1)```

- `08000000 0c000000 03420001 03690001`

    ```
    ShapePair(
        shape_1=Shape(side=0x42, color=1, radius=None),
        shape_2=Shape(side=0x69, color=1, radius=None),
    )
    ```

- `420001 690001`

    ```
    SquarePair(
        shape_1=Square(side=0x42, color=1),
        shape_2=Square(side=0x69, color=1),
    )
    ```

- `08000000 0c000000 06014200 06016900`

    ```
    ShapePair(
        shape_1=Shape(side=None, color=1, radius=0x42),
        shape_2=Shape(side=None, color=1, radius=0x69),
    )
    ```

- `690001 420001`

    ```
    CirclePair(
        shape_1=Circle(radius=0x42, color=1),
        shape_2=Circle(radius=0x69, color=1),
    )
    ```

While this serialization of `MerkleizeAs[B]` is more compact, note that it is not forward compatible and that context information that determines the underlying data type has to be indicated out of bands. If forward compatibility is required, `MerkleizeAs[B]` SHALL be converted to its base type `B` and subsequently serialized according to `B`.

## Rationale

### What are the problems solved by `StableContainer[N]`?

Current SSZ types are only stable within one version of a specification, i.e., one fork of Ethereum. This is alright for messages pertaining to a specific fork, such as attestations or beacon blocks. However, it is a limitation for messages that are expected to remain valid across forks, such as transactions or receipts. In order to support evolving the features of such perpetually valid message types, a new SSZ scheme needs to be defined. Furthermore, consumers of Merkle proofs may have a different software update cadence as Ethereum; an implementation should not break just because a new fork introduces unrelated new features.

To avoid restricting design space, the scheme has to support extension with new fields, obsolescence of old fields, and new combinations of existing fields. When such adjustments occur, old messages must still deserialize correctly and must retain their original Merkle root.

### What are the problems solved by `MerkleizeAs[B]`?

The forward compatible merkleization of `StableContainer` may be desirable even in situations where only a single sub-type is valid at any given time, e.g., as determined by the fork schedule. In such situations, message size can be reduced and type safety increased by exchanging `MerkleizeAs[B]` instead of the underlying base type. This can be useful, e.g., for consensus data structures such as `BeaconState`, to ensure that Merkle proofs for its fields remain compatible across forks.

### Why not `Union[T, U, V]`?

There is combinatorial complexity when new optional features are introduced. For example, if there are three transaction types, and then priority fees are introduced as an optional feature, one has to define three additional transaction types to allow inclusion of a priority fee, raising the total to six transaction types. If, subsequently, optional access lists are introduced, that doubles again, to twelve transactoin types.

`Union` also requires each participant of the network to know about all existing `Union` cases. For example, if the execution layer provides transactions via engine API as a `Union`, the consensus layer would also have to know about all concrete `Union` cases, even though it only wishes to package them and forward them. Using `StableContainer[N]` provides a more similar situation as JSON where the underlying type is determined based on the presence / absence of fields and their values.

Typically, the individual `Union` cases share some form of thematic overlap, sharing certain fields with each other. In a `Union`, shared fields are not necessarily merkleized at the same [generalized indices](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/merkle-proofs.md). Therefore, Merkle proof systems would have to be updated each time that a new flavor is introduced, even when the actual changes are not of interest to the particular system.

Furthermore, SSZ Union types are currently not used in any final Ethereum specification and do not have a finalized design themselves. The `StableContainer[N]` serializes very similar to current `Union[T, U, V]` proposals, with the difference being a `Bitvector[N]` as a prefix instead of a selector byte. This means that the serialized byte lengths are comparable.

### Why not a `Container` full of `Optional[T]`?

If `Optional[T]` is modeled as an SSZ type, each individual field introduces serialization and merkleization overhead. As an `Optional[T]` would be required to be ["variable-size"](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/4afe39822c9ad9747e0f5635cca117c18441ec1b/ssz/simple-serialize.md#variable-size-and-fixed-size), lots of additional offset bytes would have to be used in the serialization. For merkleization, each individual `Optional[T]` would require mixing in a bit to indicate presence or absence of the value.

Additionally, every time that the number of fields reaches a new power of 2, the Merkle roots break, as the number of chunks doubles. The `StableContainer[N]` solves this by artificially extending the Merkle tree to `N` chunks regardless of the actual number of fields currently specified. Because `N` is constant across specification versions, the Merkle tree shape remains stable. The overhead of the additional empty placeholder leaves only affects serialization of the `Bitvector[N]` (1 byte per 8 leaves); the number of required hashes during merkleization only grows logarithmically with `N`.

## Backwards Compatibility

`StableContainer[N]` and `MerkleizeAs[B]` are new SSZ types and do not conflict with other SSZ types currently in use.

## Test Cases

See [EIP assets](../assets/eip-7495/tests.py).

## Reference Implementation

See [EIP assets](../assets/eip-7495/stable_container.py), based on `protolambda/remerkleable`.

## Security Considerations

None

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
