---
eip: 7620
title: EOF Contract Creation
description: Introduce `EOFCREATE`, `TXCREATE`, `RETURNCONTRACT` instructions along with a new `InitcodeTransaction` transaction
author: Alex Beregszaszi (@axic), Paweł Bylica (@chfast), Andrei Maiboroda (@gumb0), Piotr Dobaczewski (@pdobacz)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7620-eof-contract-creation-instructions/18625
status: Review
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-02-12
requires: 170, 1559, 2028, 2718, 3540, 3541, 3670, 3860
---

## Abstract

EVM Object Format (EOF) removes the possibility to create contracts using creation transactions (with an empty `to` field), `CREATE` or `CREATE2` instructions. We introduce three new instructions: `EOFCREATE`, `TXCREATE` and `RETURNCONTRACT`, as well as a new transaction type (`InitcodeTransaction`) to provide a way to create contracts using EOF containers.

## Motivation
    
This EIP uses terminology from the [EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md) which introduces the EOF format.

EOF aims to remove code observability, which is a prerequisite to legacy EVM contract creation logic using create transactions, `CREATE` or `CREATE2`, because both the initcode and code are available to the EVM and can be manipulated. On the same premise, EOF removes opcodes like `CODECOPY` and `EXTCODECOPY`, introducing EOF subcontainers as a replacement to cater for factory contracts creating other contracts.
    
The new instructions and the new transaction type introduced in this EIP operate on EOF containers enabling all use cases of contract creation that legacy EVM has.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.
    
### Parameters

| Constant | Value |
| - | - |
| `INITCODE_TX_TYPE` | `Bytes1(0x04)` |
| `MAX_INITCODE_COUNT` | `256` |
| `GAS_KECCAK256_WORD` | Defined as `6` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Specs](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/vm/gas.py#L37C1-L37C19) |
| `TX_CREATE_COST` | Defined as `32000` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Specs](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/fork_types.py#L42) |
| `STACK_DEPTH_LIMIT` | Defined as `1024` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Specs](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/vm/interpreter.py#L60) |
| `GAS_CODE_DEPOSIT` | Defined as `200` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Specs](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/vm/gas.py#L44) |
| `TX_DATA_COST_PER_ZERO` | Defined as `4` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Specs](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/fork_types.py#L41) |
| `TX_DATA_COST_PER_NON_ZERO` | Defined as `16` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Specs](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/fork_types.py#L40) |
| `INITCODE_WORD_COST` | Defined as `2` in [EIP-3860](./eip-3860.md) |
| `MAX_INITCODE_SIZE` | Defined as `2 * MAX_CODE_SIZE` in [EIP-3860](./eip-3860.md) |
| `MAX_CODE_SIZE` | Defined as `24576` in [EIP-170](./eip-170.md) |

We introduce three new instructions on the same block number [EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md) is activated on:

1. `EOFCREATE` (`0xec`)
2. `TXCREATE` (`0xed`)
3. `RETURNCONTRACT` (`0xee`)
    
### Transaction Types

Introduce new transaction `InitcodeTransaction` (type `INITCODE_TX_TYPE`) which extends [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md) (type 2) transaction by adding a new field `initcodes: List[ByteList[MAX_INITCODE_SIZE], MAX_INITCODE_COUNT]`.

The `initcodes` can only be accessed via the `TXCREATE` instruction (see below), therefore `InitcodeTransactions` are intended to be sent to contracts including `TXCREATE` in their execution.

We introduce a standardised Creator Contract (i.e. written in EVM, but existing at a known address, such as precompiles), which eliminates the need to have create transactions with empty `to`. Deployment of the Creator Contract will require an irregular state change at EOF activation block. Note that such introduction of the Creator Contract is needed, because only EOF contracts can create EOF contracts. See below for Creator Contract code.

#### Gas schedule

Each `initcodes` item data costs the same as calldata (`TX_DATA_COST_PER_NON_ZERO` gas for non-zero bytes, `TX_DATA_COST_PER_ZERO` for zero bytes -- see [EIP-2028](./eip-2028.md)). The intrinsic gas of an `InitcodeTransaction` is extended by the sum of all those items' costs. Using the conventions from [`calculate_intrinsic_cost` in Ethereum Execution Layer Specs](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/fork.py#L687), the additional cost is calculated as:

```
initcode_cost = 0
    for initcode in tx.initcodes:
        for byte in initcode:
            if byte == 0:
                initcode_cost += TX_DATA_COST_PER_ZERO
            else:
                initcode_cost += TX_DATA_COST_PER_NON_ZERO
```

#### Transaction validation

- `InitcodeTransaction` is invalid if there are zero entries in `initcodes`, or if there are more than `MAX_INITCODE_COUNT` entries.
- `InitcodeTransaction` is invalid if any entry in `initcodes` is zero length, or if any entry exceeds `MAX_INITCODE_SIZE`.
- `InitcodeTransaction` is invalid if the `to` is `nil`.

Under transaction validation rules `initcodes` are not validated for conforming to the EOF specification. They are only validated when accessed via `TXCREATE`. This avoids potential DoS attacks of the mempool. If during the execution of an `InitcodeTransaction` no `TXCREATE` instruction is called, such transaction is still valid.

#### RLP and signature

Given the definitions from [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) the `TransactionPayload` for an `InitcodeTransaction` is the RLP serialization of:

```
[chain_id, nonce, max_priority_fee_per_gas, max_fee_per_gas, gas_limit, to, value, data, access_list, initcodes, y_parity, r, s]
```

`TransactionType` is `INITCODE_TX_TYPE` and the signature values `y_parity`, `r`, and `s` are calculated by constructing a secp256k1 signature over the following digest:

```
keccak256(INITCODE_TX_TYPE || rlp([chain_id, nonce, max_priority_fee_per_gas, max_fee_per_gas, gas_limit, to, value, data, access_list, initcodes]))
```

The [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) `ReceiptPayload` for this transaction is `rlp([status, cumulative_transaction_gas_used, logs_bloom, logs])`.

### Execution Semantics
    
- The instructions `CREATE`, `CREATE2` are made obsolete and rejected by validation in EOF contracts. They are only available in legacy contracts.
- Legacy creation transactions (any transactions with empty `to`) are invalid in case `data` contains EOF code (starts with `EF00` magic)
- If instructions `CREATE` and `CREATE2` have EOF code as initcode (starting with `EF00` magic)
    - deployment fails (returns 0 on the stack)
    - caller's nonce is not updated and gas for initcode execution is not consumed
    
#### Overview of the new contract creation flow

In EOF EVM, new bytecode is delivered inside a special field in an `InitcodeTransaction` in the form of EOF containers. Such EOF containers may contain arbitrarily deeply nesting subcontainers. A target contract of an `InitcodeTransaction` may execute `TXCREATE` instruction(s), and each execution refers to one such EOF container (the `initcontainer`). The `initcontainer` and its subcontainers are recursively validated according to all the validation rules applicable for the EOF version in question. Next, the 0th code section of the `initcontainer` is executed and may eventually call a `RETURNCONTRACT` instruction, which will refer to a subcontainer to be finally deployed to an address.

As such, `InitcodeTransaction` and `TXCREATE` are an EOF replacement of a legacy create transaction.

`EOFCREATE` instruction is in turn a replacement of the `CREATE` and `CREATE2` legacy instructions allowing factory contracts to create other contracts. The main difference to `TXCREATE` is that the `initcontainer` is selected to be one of the subcontainers of the EOF container calling `EOFCREATE`. It is worth noting that no validation is performed at this point, as it has already been done when the factory contract containing `EOFCREATE` was deployed.

Details on each instruction follow in the next sections.

#### `EOFCREATE`
    
- deduct `TX_CREATE_COST` gas
- read immediate operand `initcontainer_index`, encoded as 8-bit unsigned value
- pop `value`, `salt`, `input_offset`, `input_size` from the operand stack
- peform (and charge for) memory expansion using `[input_offset, input_size]`
- load initcode EOF subcontainer at `initcontainer_index` in the container from which `EOFCREATE` is executed
    - let `initcontainer_size` be the declared size of that EOF subcontainer in its parent container header
- deduct `GAS_KECCAK256_WORD * ((initcontainer_size + 31) // 32)` gas (hashing charge)
- check that current call depth is below `STACK_DEPTH_LIMIT` and that caller balance is enough to transfer `value`
  - in case of failure return 0 on the stack, caller's nonce is not updated and gas for initcode execution is not consumed.
- follow steps in the [Initcontainer execution](#initcontainer-execution) below
- deduct `GAS_CODE_DEPOSIT * deployed_code_size` gas

#### `TXCREATE`
    
- deduct `TX_CREATE_COST` gas
- pop `tx_initcode_hash`, `value`, `salt`, `input_offset`, `input_size` from the operand stack
- peform (and charge for) memory expansion using `[input_offset, input_size]`
- load initcode EOF container from the transaction `initcodes` array which hashes to `tx_initcode_hash`
    - fails (returns 0 on the stack) if such initcode does not exist in the transaction, or if called from a transaction of `TransactionType` other than `INITCODE_TX_TYPE`
        - caller's nonce is not updated and gas for initcode execution is not consumed. Only `TXCREATE` constant gas was consumed
    - let `initcontainer_size` be the length of that EOF container in bytes
- deduct `INITCODE_WORD_COST * ((initcontainer_size + 31) // 32)` gas
- deduct `GAS_KECCAK256_WORD * ((initcontainer_size + 31) // 32)` gas (hashing charge)
- check that current call depth is below `STACK_DEPTH_LIMIT` and that caller balance is enough to transfer `value`
- **validate the initcode container and all its subcontainers recursively**
- in addition to this, check if the initcode container has its `len(data_section)` equal `data_size`, i.e. data section content is exactly as the size declared in the header (see [Data section lifecycle](#data-section-lifecycle))
- fails (returns 0 on the stack) if any of the checks above was invalid
    - caller’s nonce is not updated and gas for initcode execution is not consumed. Only `TX_CREATE_COST` constant, [EIP-3860](./eip-3860.md) gas and hashing gas were consumed
- follow steps in the [Initcontainer execution](#initcontainer-execution) below
- deduct `GAS_CODE_DEPOSIT * deployed_code_size` gas

#### Initcontainer execution

These steps are common for `EOFCREATE` and `TXCREATE`:

- caller's memory slice [`input_offset`:`input_size`] is used as calldata
- execute the container in "initcode-mode" and deduct gas for execution. The 63/64th rule from [EIP-150](./eip-150.md) applies.
- increment `sender` account's nonce
- calculate `new_address` as `keccak256(0xff || sender || salt || keccak256(initcontainer))[12:]`
- an unsuccesful execution of initcode results in pushing `0` onto the stack
    - can populate returndata if execution `REVERT`ed
- a successful execution ends with initcode executing `RETURNCONTRACT{deploy_container_index}(aux_data_offset, aux_data_size)` instruction (see below). After that:
    - load deploy EOF subcontainer at `deploy_container_index` in the container from which `RETURNCONTRACT` is executed
    - concatenate data section with `(aux_data_offset, aux_data_offset + aux_data_size)` memory segment and update data size in the header
    - if updated deploy container size exceeds `MAX_CODE_SIZE` instruction exceptionally aborts
    - set `state[new_address].code` to the updated deploy container
    - push `new_address` onto the stack
- `RETURN` and `STOP` are not allowed in "initcode-mode" (abort execution)
- "initcode-mode" *is not transitive* - it is only active for the frame executing the initcontainer. If another (non-create) call is made from this frame, it *is not* executed in "initcode-mode".

#### `RETURNCONTRACT`
    
- read immediate operand `deploy_container_index`, encoded as 8-bit unsigned value
- pop two values from the operand stack: `aux_data_offset`, `aux_data_size` referring to memory section that will be appended to deployed container's data
- cost 0 gas + possible memory expansion for aux data
- ends initcode frame execution and returns control to EOFCREATE/4 caller frame where `deploy_container_index` and `aux_data` are used to construct deployed contract (see above)
- instruction exceptionally aborts if after the appending, data section size would overflow the maximum data section size or underflow (i.e. be less than data section size declared in the header)
- instruction exceptionally aborts if invoked not in "initcode-mode"

### Code Validation
    
We extend code section validation rules (as defined in [EIP-3670](./eip-3670.md)).
    
1. `EOFCREATE` `initcontainer_index` must be less than `num_container_sections`
1. `EOFCREATE` the subcontainer pointed to by `initcontainer_index` must have its `len(data_section)` equal `data_size`, i.e. data section content is exactly as the size declared in the header (see [Data section lifecycle](#data-section-lifecycle))
2. `RETURNCONTRACT` `deploy_container_index` must be less than `num_container_sections`
3. `RJUMP`, `RJUMPI` and `RJUMPV` immediate argument value (jump destination relative offset) validation: code section is invalid in case offset points to the byte directly following either `EOFCREATE` or `RETURNCONTRACT` instruction.

### Data Section Lifecycle

**For an EOF container which has not yet been deployed**, the `data_section` is only a portion of the final `data_section` after deployment.
Let's define it as `pre_deploy_data_section` and as `pre_deploy_data_size` the `data_size` declared in that container's header.
`pre_deploy_data_size >= len(pre_deploy_data_section)`, which anticipates more data to be appended to the `pre_deploy_data_section` during the process of deploying.

```
pre_deploy_data_section
|                                      |
\___________pre_deploy_data_size______/
```

**For a deployed EOF container**, the final `data_section` becomes:

```
pre_deploy_data_section | static_aux_data | dynamic_aux_data
|                         |             |                  |
|                          \___________aux_data___________/
|                                       |                  |
\___________pre_deploy_data_size______/                    |
|                                                          |
\________________________data_size_______________________/
```

where:
    
- `aux_data` is the data which is appended to `pre_deploy_data_section` on `RETURNCONTRACT` instruction [see Initcontainer execution](#initcontainer-execution).
- `static_aux_data` is a subrange of `aux_data`, which size is known before `RETURNCONTRACT` and equals `pre_deploy_data_size - len(pre_deploy_data_section)`.
- `dynamic_aux_data` is the remainder of `aux_data`.

`data_size` in the deployed container header is updated to be equal `len(data_section)`.

Summarizing, there are `pre_deploy_data_size` bytes in the final data section which are guaranteed to exist before the EOF container is deployed and `len(dynamic_aux_data)` bytes which are known to exist only after.
This impacts the validation and behavior of data-section-accessing instructions: `DATALOAD`, `DATALOADN`, and `DATACOPY`, see [EIP-7480](./eip-7480.md).

### Creator Contract

```solidity
{
/// Takes [index][salt][init_data] as input,
/// creates contract and returns the address or failure otherwise

/// init_data.length can be 0, but the first 2 words are mandatory
let size := calldatasize()
if lt(size, 64) { revert(0, 0) }

let tx_initcode_index := calldataload(0)
let salt := calldataload(32)

let init_data_size := sub(size, 64)
calldatacopy(0, 64, init_data_size)

let ret := txcreate(tx_initcode_index, callvalue(), salt, 0, init_data_size)
if iszero(ret) { revert(0, 0) }

mstore(0, ret)
return(0, 32)

// Helper to compile this with existing Solidity (with --strict-assembly mode)
function txcreate(a, b, c, d, e) -> f {
    f := verbatim_5i_1o(hex"ed", a, b, c, d, e)
}
    
}
```
    
## Rationale

### Data section appending

The data section is appended to during contract creation and also its size needs to be updated in the header. Alternative designs were considered, where:

- additional section kinds for the data were introduced
- additional fields describing a subcontainer were introduced
- data section would be written over as opposed to being appended to, requiring it to be filled with 0 bytes prior to deployment
    
All of these alternatives either complicated the otherwise simple data structures or took away useful features (like the dynamically sized portion of the data section).

### `TXCREATE`

An alternative design was discussed, where instead of `TXCREATE`, `InitcodeTransaction` and the Creator Contract, the legacy-like creation transactions (with empty `to`) continue to be available to send EOF initcontainers in transactions and perform deployment of EOF contracts.

This makes it impossible for smart contract wallets to deploy arbitrary contracts (only EOAs can), which is a desired feature of current legacy creation rules. A workaround where those arbitrary contracts are first "uploaded" to a factory contract, and then deployed using `EOFCREATE`, is not satisfactory.

### `TXCREATE` failure modes
    
`TXCREATE` has two "light" failure modes in case the initcontainer is not present and in case the EOF validation is unsuccessful. An alternative design where both cases led to a "hard" failure (consuming the entire gas available) was considered. We decided to have the more granular and forgiving failure modes in order to align the gas costs incurred to the actual work the EVM performs.

### Creator Contract

EOF contract creation requires the Creator Contract be introduced via a state change, because neither legacy contracts nor create transactions can deploy EOF code. The alternative approach which was to continue using legacy creation would still rely on fetching the *initcode* from memory and not satisfy the requirement of code non-observability.

### EOF validation checking initcode-mode

Extra EOF validation rules were considered:

- Each EOF subcontainer must either be referenced by an `EOFCREATE` or a `RETURNCONTRACT` instruction, but never both
- Each EOF subcontainer may either contain `RETURNCONTRACT` or `RETURN` / `STOP` instructions, but never a mix of these two kinds
- A subcontainer referenced by an `EOFCREATE` must never contain a `RETURN` / `STOP` instruction, whereas a subcontainer referenced by a `RETURNCONTRACT` must never contain a `RETURNCONTRACT`

These rules were not adopted to avoid the extra logic and complexity (esp. the last rule causes EOF validation of subcontainers to not be self-contained).

## Backwards Compatibility

This change poses no risk to backwards compatibility, as it is introduced at the same time EIP-3540 is. The new instructions are not introduced for legacy bytecode (code which is not EOF formatted), and the contract creation options do not change for legacy bytecode.
    
Legacy create transactions with `data` starting with `EF00` now are invalid. Similarly `CREATE` and `CREATE2` calls with `EF00` initcode fail early without executing the initcode. Previously, in both cases the initcode execution would begin and fail on the first undefined instruction `EF`.

## Test Cases

Creation transaction, `CREATE` and `CREATE2` cannot have its *code* starting with `0xEF`, but such cases are covered already in [EIP-3541](./eip-3541.md). However, new cases must be added where creation transaction, `CREATE` or `CREATE2` have its *initcode* being (validly or invalidly) EOF formatted:
    
| Initcode | Expected result |
| - | - |
| `0xEF` | initcode starts execution and fails |
| `0xEF01` | initcode starts execution and fails |
| `0xEF5f` | initcode starts execution and fails |
| `0xEF00` | invalid creation transaction (or `CREATE` / `CREATE2` fails early, returns 0 and keeps sender nonce intact) |
| `0xEF0001` | as above |
| valid EOFv1 container | as above |

Since EOF contract validation happens for all EOF containers during `TXCREATE`, the following cases must be tested:
    
- `TXCREATE` references a valid EOF `initcontainer` having only valid subcontainers
- `TXCREATE` references legacy code, contract creation fails
- `TXCREATE` references an invalid EOF `initcontainer`, contract creation fails
- `TXCREATE` references a valid EOF `initcontainer` having an invalid EOF subcontainer somewhere in the subcontainer tree, contract creation fails
- `TXCREATE` references a valid EOF `initcontainer` having legacy code somewhere in the subcontainer tree, contract creation fails
  
Cases for initcode calling "nested" `EOFCREATE` or `TXCREATE` in various combinations
    
## Security Considerations

`TXCREATE` needs a detailed review and discussion as that is where external unverified code enters the state. Among others:

1. Is its complexity under control, ruling out any DoS attempts
2. Is it correctly priced and always charged for
3. Is the validation comprehensive and not allowing problematic code to be saved into the state

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
