---
eip: 5656
title: MCOPY - Memory copying instruction
description: An efficient EVM instruction for copying memory areas
author: Alex Beregszaszi (@axic), Paul Dworzanski (@poemm), Jared Wasinger (@jwasinger), Casey Detrio (@cdetrio), Pawel Bylica (@chfast), Charles Cooper (@charles-cooper)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-5656-mcopy-instruction/10890
status: Review
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2021-02-01
---

## Abstract

Provide an efficient EVM instruction for copying memory areas.

## Motivation

Memory copying is a basic operation, yet implementing it on the EVM comes with overhead.

This was recognised and alleviated early on with the introduction of the "identity" precompile, which accomplishes
memory copying by the use of `CALL`'s input and output memory offsets. Its cost is `15 + 3 * (length / 32)` gas, plus
the call overhead. The identity precompile was rendered ineffective by the raise of the cost of `CALL` to 700, but subsequently
the reduction by [EIP-2929](./eip-2929.md) made it slightly more economical.

Copying exact words can be accomplished with `<offset> MLOAD <offset> MSTORE` or `<offset> DUP1 MLOAD DUP2 MSTORE`,
at a cost of at least 12 gas per word. This is fairly efficient if the offsets are known upfront and the copying can be unrolled.
In case copying is implemented at runtime with arbitrary starting offsets, besides the control flow overhead, the offset
will need to be incremented using `32 ADD`, adding at least 6 gas per word.

Copying non-exact words is more tricky, as for the last partial word, both the source and destination needs to be loaded,
masked, or'd, and stored again. This overhead is significant. One edge case is if the last "partial word" is a single byte,
it can be efficiently stored using `MSTORE8`.

As example use case, copying 256 bytes costs:

- at least 757 gas pre-EIP-2929 using the identity precompile
- at least 157 gas post-EIP-2929 using the identity precompile
- at least 96 gas using unrolled `MLOAD`/`MSTORE` instructions
- 27 gas using this EIP

According to an analysis of blocks 10537502 to 10538702, roughly 10.5% of memory copies would have had improved performance with the
availability of an `MCOPY` instruction.

Memory copying is used by languages like Solidity and Vyper, where we expect this improvement to provide efficient means of building
data structures, including efficient sliced access and copies of memory objects. Having a dedicated `MCOPY` instruction would also add
forward protection against future gas cost changes to `CALL` instructions in general.

Having a special `MCOPY` instruction makes the job of static analyzers and optimizers easier, since the effects of a `CALL` in general
have to be fenced, whereas an `MCOPY` instruction would be known to only have memory effects. Even if special cases are added
for precompiles, a future hard fork could change `CALL` effects, and so any analysis of code using the identity precompile would only
be valid for a certain range of blocks.

Finally, we expect memory copying to be immensely useful for various computationally heavy operations, such as EVM384,
where it is identified as a significant overhead.

## Specification

The instruction `MCOPY` is introduced at `0x5E`.

### Input stack

| Stack | Value |
|-------|-------|
| top - 0 | `dst` |
| top - 1 | `src` |
| top - 2 | `length` |

This ordering matches the other copying instructions, i.e. `CALLDATACOPY`, `RETURNDATACOPY`.

### Gas costs

Per yellow paper terminology, it should be considered part of the `W_copy` group of opcodes, and follow the gas calculation for `W_copy` in the yellow paper. While the calculation in the yellow paper should be considered the final word, for reference, as of time of this writing, that currently means its gas cost is:

```
words_copied = (length + 31) // 32
g_verylow    = 3
g_copy       = 3 * words_copied + memory_expansion_cost
gas_cost     = g_verylow + g_copy
```

### Output stack

This instruction returns no stack items.

### Semantics

It copies `length` bytes from the offset pointed at `src` to the offset pointed at `dst` in memory.
Copying takes place as if an intermediate buffer was used, allowing the destination and source to overlap.

If `length > 0` and (`src + length` or `dst + length`) is beyond the current memory length, the memory is extended with respective gas cost applied.

The gas cost of this instruction mirrors that of other `Wcopy` instructions and is `Gverylow + Gcopy * ceil(length / 32)`.

## Rationale

Production implementation of exact-word memory copying and partial-word memory copying can be found in the Solidity, Vyper and Fe compilers.

With [EIP-2929](./eip-2929.md) the call overhead using the identity precompile was reduced from 700 to 100 gas.
This is still prohibitive for making the precompile a reasonable alternative again.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP introduces a new instruction which did not exist previously. Already deployed contracts using this instruction could change their behaviour after this EIP.

## Test Cases

`MCOPY 0 32 32` - copy 32 bytes from offset 32 to offset 0.

pre (spaces included for readability):

```
0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0f101112131415161718191a1b1c1d1e1f
```

post:

```
000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0f101112131415161718191a1b1c1d1e1f 000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0f101112131415161718191a1b1c1d1e1f
```

gas used: 6

`MCOPY 0 0 32` - copy 32 bytes from offset 0 to offset 0.

pre:

```
0101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101
```

post:

```
0101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101
```

gas used: 6

`MCOPY 0 1 8` - copy 8 bytes from offset 1 to offset 0 (overlapping).

pre:

```
000102030405060708 0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

post:

```
010203040506070808 0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

gas used: 6

`MCOPY 1 0 8` - copy 8 bytes from offset 0 to offset 1 (overlapping).

pre:

```
000102030405060708 0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

post:

```
00000102030405060708 00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

gas used: 6

## Security Considerations

TBA

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
