---
eip: 5247
title: Smart Contract Executable Proposal Interface
description: An interface to create and execute proposals.
author: Zainan Victor Zhou (@xinbenlv)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/erc-5247-executable-proposal-standard/9938
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-07-13
---

## Abstract

This EIP presents an interface for "smart contract executable proposals": proposals that are submitted to, recorded on, and possibly executed on-chain. Such proposals include a series of information about
function calls including the target contract address, ether value to be transmitted, gas limits and calldatas.

## Motivation

It is oftentimes necessary to separate the code that is to be executed from the actual execution of the code.

A typical use case for this EIP is in a Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO). A proposer will create a smart proposal and advocate for it. Members will then choose whether or not to endorse the proposal and vote accordingly (see [EIP-1202](./eip-1202.md)). Finallym when consensus has been formed, the proposal is executed.

A second typical use-case is that one could have someone who they trust, such as a delegator, trustee, or an attorney-in-fact, or any bilateral collaboration format, where a smart proposal will be first composed, discussed, approved in some way, and then put into execution.

A third use-case is that a person could make an "offer" to a second person, potentially with conditions. The smart proposal can be presented as an offer and the second person can execute it if they choose to accept this proposal.

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.17;

interface IERC5247 {
    event ProposalCreated(
        address indexed proposer,
        uint256 indexed proposalId,
        address[] targets,
        uint256[] values,
        uint256[] gasLimits,
        bytes[] calldatas,
        bytes extraParams
    );

    event ProposalExecuted(
        address indexed executor,
        uint256 indexed proposalId,
        bytes extraParams
    );

    function createProposal(
        uint256 proposalId,
        address[] calldata targets,
        uint256[] calldata values,
        uint256[] calldata gasLimits,
        bytes[] calldata calldatas,
        bytes calldata extraParams
    ) external returns (uint256 registeredProposalId);

    function executeProposal(uint256 proposalId, bytes calldata extraParams) external;
}
```

## Rationale

* Originally, this interface was part of part of [EIP-1202](./eip-1202.md). However, the proposal itself can potentially have many use cases outside of voting. It is possible that voting may not need to be upon a proposal in any particular format. Hence, we decide to *decouple the voting interface and proposal interface*.
* Arrays were used for `target`s, `value`s, `calldata`s instead of single variables, allowing a proposal to carry arbitrarily long multiple functional calls.
* `registeredProposalId` is returned in `createProposal` so the standard can support implementation to decide their own format of proposal id.

## Security Considerations

Needs discussion.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
