---
eip: 7640
title: Transaction Revert Protection
description: Defines a new transaction type which rejects reverted transactions
author: Joseph Poon (@josephpoon), Christopher Jeffrey (@chjj), Boyma Fahnbulleh (@boymanjor)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7640-transaction-revert-protection/19000
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-02-28
requires: 140, 141, 658, 1559, 2718, 2930
---

## Abstract

A consensus rule to flag a reverted transaction as invalid, i.e., ineligible for
block inclusion, providing consensus layer assurance that users do not pay gas
fees for unsuccessful transaction execution.

[EIP-658](./eip-658.md) designates a transaction as "failed" if its receipt
contains a status code of `0x0`. This status code indicates that execution of
the transaction resulted in error, and the proposed state updates were
reverted. However, the transaction was still included in a block, and the
sender paid gas fees for a transaction that had no meaningful effect on the
state of the network.

We introduce a new [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) transaction type, with the format
`0x04 || rlp([revert_protect, chain_id, nonce, max_priority_fee_per_gas,
max_fee_per_gas, gas_limit, destination, amount, data, access_list,
signature_y_parity, signature_r, signature_s])`.

Under the proposed rule, if a transaction's `revert_protect` field is set to
`0x01`, an error during execution invalidates the transaction. Network clients
must reject the transaction, as well as any block that includes it. As a policy
rule, _any_ transaction which has the `revert_protect` field set to `0x01` is
neither propagated nor accepted on the default Ethereum mempool p2p network.

The transaction format is otherwise identical to the [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md)
transaction format and behaves accordingly.

## Motivation

Ethereum has historically charged gas for execution of EVM bytecode regardless
of the transaction's failure ("revert") status. This was implemented as a
simple means of DoS protection. Unfortunately, this has significant
implications for potentially valid transactions which are, by happenstance,
produced in a block in tandem with a temporarily incompatible network state. If
such a transaction is propagated throughout the Ethereum p2p mempool network,
it is almost always charged gas fees despite its non-execution.

Currently, block building services which provide revert protection are trusted
systems which provide no consensus enforcement. The absence of a consensus rule
enforcing revert protection results in any service or network with similar
functionality being necessarily centralized. Without a new consensus rule,
builders and Proposer-Builder-Seperation are necessarily trusted centralized
authorities as that is the only way a fee market can form from transactions
with significant contention (many transactions want to change the same state
record, where only one is successful).

New trust-minimized mempool propagation protocols can be devised where
revert-protected transactions propagate without concern for transactions
eventually getting into a block and the user paying for reverts.

By providing consensus layer revert protection, new use cases can be enabled
where an otherwise reverted transaction can remain pending until a certain
condition is met. For example, one can construct a "Fill-or-Kill" transaction
which does not get built in a block unless the "Fill" condition is met. This
brings the concept of "intents" to Ethereum's mempool.

The fee payment for [ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) Account Abstraction builders
provide greater assurance of successful transaction execution. This makes it so
that Account Abstraction users do not need to rely upon a single builder to
build their transactions, as fee accounting would be atomically always paid in
the bundled transaction when the Account Abstraction bundler, even if the
builder is not the same as the block builder. Without this change, Account
Abstraction contracts would either need to specify a designated bundler or to
use centralized builder services, as it would otherwise be too risky to be
paying revertable transactions on any public mempool with open
gossip/propagation.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

As of `FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER`, a new [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) transaction is
introduced with a `TransactionType` of `0x04` (4).

A transaction with a `TransactionType` of `0x04` MUST have the following
properties:

* An [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) `TransactionPayload` format of
  `rlp([revert_protect, chain_id, nonce, max_priority_fee_per_gas,
  max_fee_per_gas, gas_limit, destination, amount, data, access_list,
  signature_y_parity, signature_r, signature_s])`.
* A `revert_protect` field set to `0x00` or `0x01`. Network clients MUST
  consider any other values invalid. If `revert_protect` is set to `0x00`,
  transaction revert protection is disabled, and transaction execution MUST
  follow the behavior specified by [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md). If
  `revert_protect` is set to `0x01`, transaction revert protection is enabled.
* `signature_y_parity`, `signature_r`, and `signature_s` fields representing a
  secp256k1 signature over the following hash: `keccak256(0x04 ||
  rlp([revert_protect, chain_id, nonce, max_priority_fee_per_gas,
  max_fee_per_gas, gas_limit, destination, amount, data, access_list]))`.
* An [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) `ReceiptPayload` format as specified in
  [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md).

A transaction with a `TransactionType` of `0x04` AND the `revert_protect` field
set to `0x01` MUST elicit the following behavior:

* If transaction execution results in an error, network clients MUST consider
  the transaction invalid and network clients MUST NOT include it in a block.
* Network clients MUST consider the `0xfc` opcode a no-op when evaluated with a
  gas cost of 6 during transaction execution.

Network clients SHOULD NOT relay a pending transaction with a `TransactionType`
of `0x04` AND the `revert_protect` field set to `0x01`, nor list it as
available to peers on the default Ethereum Transaction Exchange mempool
network. Alternative mempools MAY relay the pending transaction, even if the
pending transaction is invalid.

If a network client receives on the default Ethereum Transaction Exchange
mempool a pending transaction data with a `TransactionType` of `0x04` AND the
`revert_protect` field set to `0x01`, the network client SHOULD consider the
pending transaction invalid and handle the peer accordingly. However, the
pending transaction MAY be propagated and accepted on using alternative
mempools, methods, or protocols.

## Rationale

Transactions may depend upon contract states which were valid at the time of
broadcast but are no longer valid at the time of block assembly, causing a
revert.

Without `revert_protect` enabled, anyone with access to an unprotected
transaction could then relay it to a party who includes it in a block as a
reverted transaction. Providing revert protection increases the ability to
match the functionality of centralized builders.

Due to the obvious DoS concerns, it is necessary to avoid relay of
reverted-protected transactions on the default Ethereum p2p mempool.
Transactions can easily be constructed to use a large amount of gas for no
payment, and can likewise be constructed such that they will *never*
successfully execute.

Alternate relay systems can be built on top of this change (where it would not
have been possible before). While existing RPC servers/services could provide
transaction revert protection with trust minimization, it is possible to
construct more decentralized designs and explore novel propagation policies.

For example, an alternate p2p mempool strictly for `revert_protect` could be
constructed where only 100 messages per second can be sent prioritized by the
amount of ETH staked with a socially agreed timeout for these transactions
(e.g. 10 minutes). More exotic constructions can constructed via accounting of
staked ETH relative to the amount of transactions/gas used over a period of
time. It is presumed that these alternative mempools may be free to gossip
invalid transactions (but only build blocks with valid transactions when
`revert_protect` is set).

Various implementations can be done in an opt-in manner much like how mev-boost
is an opt-in change. These alternate relay systems can instead exist in an
fully decentralized open system which do not rely upon a single provider
promising not to redistribute the transaction before it being built in a block.
Nodes on the alternative p2p mempool network may gossip any transactions they
see to other untrusted nodes. Whereas without revert protection, gossip of
invalid transactions is risky and potentially costly as it may be included in a
block by any third party builder or proposer.

This could also enable future opportunities for decentralized bundling and
other protocol changes as well. These types of functions are treated as outside
the scope of this proposal.

This proposal, however, does not provide for any secrecy of transaction data
before transaction broadcast. It instead allows for pending transactions to be
relayed in a more broad manner without the need for trusted builders.

This proposal is expected to be compatible with [ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md).
Bundlers without this change could provide trusted assurance that they are not
including reverted transactions. However, to take advantage of this change,
[ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) bundlers can construct two transactions: one with
transactions where reverts are permitted and one where transactions do not
include any reverts.

This may also be contributive for [ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) bundlers, as their
relayed transaction bundles are currently at the mercy of block builders. The
latter group currently has the ability to attack the bundle by altering the
network state thereby invalidating a bundled transaction.

With revert protection, the transaction would not be included in the block by
consensus (and the bundler would not bear the cost of an unsuccessful reverted
bundled transaction).

When `revert_protect` is enabled, the EVM opcode of `0xfc` is treated as a
no-op for use cases such as [ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md), where users can send
Account Abstraction transactions to bundlers while ensuring that the bundler
MUST include it in a non-revertible transaction type for their transaction to
be successfully included in a block. An opcode is used instead of a precompile
as it could be a very frequently accessed opcode in Account Abstraction
transactions.

## Backwards Compatibility

This change has no effect on contracts created in the past unless they contain
the opcode `0xfc` as an `INVALID` instruction AND the `revert_protect` is
enabled. Contracts should not have used `0xfc` as `INVALID` in the past, as the
proper and expected opcode to use for `INVALID` is `0xfe`.

## Security Considerations

If `revert_protect` is enabled, network clients should not relay the
transaction on the current default p2p mempool network.  If a revert-protected
transaction is received, clients should treat it as an invalid transaction,
e.g., a transaction with an invalid signature or other malformed transaction
properties.

If one is designing a method to propagate revert-protected transactions, it is
necessary to consider the implications of DoS attacks. It may also be necessary
to set up flow controls (whether it be per-transaction or only accepting the
highest-value transactions, etc), see Rationale section for examples.

Users should take into account the possibility of nonce gaps when using
`revert_protect`. If a transaction fails, subsequent transactions may need to
reuse the nonce.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
