---
eip: 7528
title: ETH (Native Asset) Address Convention
description: An address placeholder for ETH when used in the same context as an ERC-20 token.
author: Joey Santoro (@joeysantoro)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7808-eth-native-asset-address-convention/15989
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-10-03
requires: 20, 4626
---

## Abstract

The following standard proposes a convention for using the address `0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000E` (0xe) in all contexts where an address is used to represent ETH in the same capacity as an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token. This would apply to both events where an address field would denote ETH or an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token, as well as discriminators such as the `asset` field of an [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md) vault.

This standard generalizes to other EVM chains where the native asset is not ETH.

## Motivation

ETH, being a fungible unit of value, often behaves similarly to [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) tokens. Protocols tend to implement a standard interface for ERC-20 tokens, and benefit from having the ETH implementation to closely mirror the [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) implementations.

In many cases, protocols opt to use Wrapped ETH (e.g. WETH9 deployed at address 0xc02aaa39b223fe8d0a0e5c4f27ead9083c756cc2 on Etherum Mainnet) for [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) compliance. In other cases, protocols will use native ETH due to gas considerations, or the requirement of using native ETH such as in the case of a Liquid Staking Token (LST).

In addition, protocols might create separate events for handling ETH native cases and ERC-20 cases. This creates data fragmentation and integration overhead for off-chain infrastructure. By having a strong convention for an ETH address to use for cases where it behaves like an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token, it becomes beneficial to use one single event format for both cases. 

One intended use case for the standard is [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md) compliant LSTs which use ETH as the `asset`. This extends the benefits and tooling of [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md) to LSTs and integrating protocols.

This standard allows protocols and off-chain data infrastructure to coordinate around a shared understanding that any time `0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000E` is used as an address in an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) context, it means ETH.

## Specification

This standard applies for all components of smart contract systems in which an address is used to identify an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token, and where native ETH is used in certain instances in place of an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token. The usage of the term Token below means ETH or an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) in this context.

Any fields or events where an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) address is used, yet the underlying Token is ETH, the address field MUST return `0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000E`

`0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000E` MUST NOT be used as a precompile address in a future hard fork, unless this precompile specifies an enshrined [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) implementation for ETH.

Any fields or events where the Token is a non-enshrined wrapped ERC-20 version of ETH MUST use that Token's address and MUST NOT use `0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000E`.

## Rationale

Smart Contract Systems which use both ETH and [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) in the same context should have a single address convention for the ETH case. 

### Considered alternative addresses

Many existing implementations of the same use case as this standard use addresses such as 0x0, 0x1, and 0xeeee...eeee. Let us discuss the pros and cons of these:

* 0x0 - gas efficient by containing many zero bytes, however suboptimal due to collision with uninitialized values.
* 0x1 - gas efficient by containing many zero bytes, however suboptimal due to being a non-distinctive value and colliding with a precompile address.
* 0xeeee...eeee - distinctive address with the repetition of the letter "e" being a nod to the first letter of Ether, however gas inefficient.

0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000E is used in the standard by combining the gas benefits of having leading zero bytes, no collisions with precompiles or null addresses, and a distinctive nod to Ether/EVM with the use of the letter "e"


## Backwards Compatibility

This standard is backward compatible with the [ERC-4626](./eip-4626.md) standard by using `0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000E` the `asset` field when the Token is ETH. This would be technically non-compliant as `asset` is required to be an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) token contract, however either the 4626 standard can be edited for this edge case, or a new ETH specific standard can be written with maximum backward compatibility otherwise.

This standard has no known compatibility issues with other standards.

## Security Considerations

Using ETH as a Token instead of WETH exposes smart contract systems to re-entrancy and similar classes of vulnerabilities. Implementers must take care to follow the industry standard development patterns (e.g.  checks-effects-interactions) when the Token is ETH.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
