---
eip: 6404
title: SSZ Transactions Root
description: Migration of transactions MPT commitment to SSZ
author: Etan Kissling (@etan-status), Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-6404-ssz-transactions-root/12783
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-01-30
requires: 6493, 7495
---

## Abstract

This EIP defines a migration process of existing Merkle-Patricia Trie (MPT) commitments for transactions to [Simple Serialize (SSZ)](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/ef434e87165e9a4c82a99f54ffd4974ae113f732/ssz/simple-serialize.md).

## Motivation

While the consensus `ExecutionPayloadHeader` and the execution block header map to each other conceptually, they are encoded differently. This EIP aims to align the encoding of the `transactions_root`, taking advantage of the more modern SSZ format. This brings several advantages:

1. **Transaction inclusion proofs:** Changing the transaction representation to [EIP-6493 `SignedTransaction`](./eip-6493.md) commits to the transaction root hash on-chain, allowing verification of the list of all transaction hashes within a block, and allowing compact transaction inclusion proofs.

2. **Reducing complexity:** The proposed design reduces the number of use cases that require support for Merkle-Patricia Trie (MPT), RLP encoding, keccak hashing, and secp256k1 public key recovery.

3. **Reducing ambiguity:** The name `transactions_root` is currently used to refer to different roots. While the execution block header refers to a Merkle Patricia Trie (MPT) root, the consensus `ExecutionPayloadHeader` instead refers to an SSZ root. With these changes, `transactions_root` consistently refers to the same SSZ root.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Consensus `ExecutionPayload` changes

When building a consensus `ExecutionPayload`, the [`transactions`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/ef434e87165e9a4c82a99f54ffd4974ae113f732/specs/capella/beacon-chain.md#executionpayload) list is now based on the [`SignedTransaction`](./eip-6493.md) SSZ container. [EIP-6493](./eip-6493.md) defines how RLP transactions can be converted to SSZ.

| Name | Value |
| - | - |
| [`MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_PAYLOAD`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/ef434e87165e9a4c82a99f54ffd4974ae113f732/specs/bellatrix/beacon-chain.md#execution) | `uint64(2**20)` (= 1,048,576) |

```python
class ExecutionPayload(Container):
    ...
    transactions: List[SignedTransaction, MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_PAYLOAD]
    ...
```

### Consensus `ExecutionPayloadHeader` changes

The [consensus `ExecutionPayloadHeader`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/ef434e87165e9a4c82a99f54ffd4974ae113f732/specs/capella/beacon-chain.md#executionpayloadheader) is updated for the new `ExecutionPayload.transactions` definition.

```python
payload_header.transactions_root = payload.transactions.hash_tree_root()
```

### Execution block header changes

The [execution block header's `txs-root`](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/6b259a7003b4bfb18365ba690f4b00ba8a26393b/caps/eth.md#block-encoding-and-validity) is updated to match the consensus `ExecutionPayloadHeader.transactions_root`.

### Transaction indexing

While a unique transaction identifier `tx_hash` is defined for each transaction, there is no on-chain commitment to this identifier for RLP transactions. Instead, transactions are ["summarized"](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/ef434e87165e9a4c82a99f54ffd4974ae113f732/ssz/simple-serialize.md#summaries-and-expansions) by their [`hash_tree_root`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/ef434e87165e9a4c82a99f54ffd4974ae113f732/ssz/simple-serialize.md#merkleization).

```python
def compute_tx_root(tx: SignedTransaction) -> Root:
    return tx.hash_tree_root()
```

Note that for SSZ transactions with `tx.signature.type_ == TRANSACTION_TYPE_SSZ`, the `tx_hash` is equivalent to the `tx_root`. Like the `tx_hash`, the `tx_root` remains perpetually [stable](./eip-7495.md) across future upgrades.

It is RECOMMENDED that implementations introduce indices for tracking transactions by `tx_root`.

## Rationale

This change enables the use of SSZ transactions as defined in [EIP-6493](./eip-6493.md).

## Backwards Compatibility

Applications that rely on the replaced MPT `transactions_root` in the block header require migration to the SSZ `transactions_root`.

While there is no on-chain commitment of the `tx_hash`, it is widely used in JSON-RPC and the [Ethereum Wire Protocol](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/6b259a7003b4bfb18365ba690f4b00ba8a26393b/caps/eth.md) to uniquely identify transactions. The `tx_root` is a different identifier and will be required for use cases such as transaction inclusion proofs where an on-chain commitment is required.

## Test Cases

TBD

## Reference Implementation

TBD

## Security Considerations

None

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
