---
eip: 1459
title: Node Discovery via DNS
description: Scheme for authenticated updateable Ethereum node lists via DNS.
author: Felix Lange (@fjl), Péter Szilágyi (@karalabe)
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/issues/50
status: Stagnant
type: Standards Track
category: Networking
created: 2018-09-26
requires: 778
---

## Abstract

This document describes a scheme for authenticated, updateable Ethereum node
lists retrievable via DNS.

## Motivation

Many Ethereum clients contain hard-coded bootstrap node lists. Updating those
lists requires a software update. The current lists are small, giving the client
little choice of initial entry point into the Ethereum network. We would like to
maintain larger node lists containing hundreds of nodes, and update them
regularly.

The scheme described here is a replacement for client bootstrap node lists with
equivalent security and many additional benefits. Large lists populated by
traversing the node discovery DHT can serve as a fallback option for nodes which
can't join the DHT due to restrictive network policy. DNS-based node lists may
also be useful to Ethereum peering providers because their customers can
configure the client to use the provider's list.

## Specification

A 'node list' is a list of 'node records' [as defined by EIP-778](./eip-778.md)
of arbitrary length. Lists
may refer to other lists using links. The entire list is signed using a
secp256k1 private key. The corresponding public key must be known to the client
in order to verify the list.

To refer to a DNS node list, clients use a URL with 'enrtree' scheme. The URL
contains the DNS name on which the list can be found as well as the public key
that signed the list. The public key is contained in the username part of the
URL and is the base32 encoding (RFC-4648) of the compressed 32-byte binary public key.

Example:

    enrtree://AM5FCQLWIZX2QFPNJAP7VUERCCRNGRHWZG3YYHIUV7BVDQ5FDPRT2@nodes.example.org

This URL refers to a node list at the DNS name 'nodes.example.org' and is signed
by the public key
`0x049f88229042fef9200246f49f94d9b77c4e954721442714e85850cb6d9e5daf2d880ea0e53cb3ac1a75f9923c2726a4f941f7d326781baa6380754a360de5c2b6`

### DNS Record Structure

The nodes in a list are encoded as a merkle tree for distribution via the DNS
protocol. Entries of the merkle tree are contained in DNS TXT records. The root
of the tree is a TXT record with the following content:

    enrtree-root:v1 e=<enr-root> l=<link-root> seq=<sequence-number> sig=<signature>

where

- `enr-root` and `link-root` refer to the root hashes of subtrees containing
  nodes and links subtrees.
- `sequence-number` is the tree's update sequence number, a decimal integer.
- `signature` is a 65-byte secp256k1 EC signature over the keccak256 hash of the
  record content, excluding the `sig=` part, encoded as URL-safe base64 (RFC-4648).

Further TXT records on subdomains map hashes to one of three entry types. The
subdomain name of any entry is the base32 encoding of the (abbreviated)
keccak256 hash of its text content.

- `enrtree-branch:<h₁>,<h₂>,...,<hₙ>` is an intermediate tree entry containing
  hashes of subtree entries.
- `enrtree://<key>@<fqdn>` is a leaf pointing to a different list located at
  another fully qualified domain name. Note that this format matches the URL
  encoding. This type of entry may only appear in the subtree pointed to by
  `link-root`.
- `enr:<node-record>` is a leaf containing a node record. The node record is
  encoded as a URL-safe base64 string. Note that this type of entry matches the
  canonical ENR text encoding. It may only appear in the `enr-root` subtree.

No particular ordering or structure is defined for the tree. Whenever the tree
is updated, its sequence number should increase. The content of any TXT record
should be small enough to fit into the 512 byte limit imposed on UDP DNS
packets. This limits the number of hashes that can be placed into an
`enrtree-branch` entry.

Example in zone file format:

    ; name                        ttl     class type  content
    @                             60      IN    TXT   enrtree-root:v1 e=JWXYDBPXYWG6FX3GMDIBFA6CJ4 l=C7HRFPF3BLGF3YR4DY5KX3SMBE seq=1 sig=o908WmNp7LibOfPsr4btQwatZJ5URBr2ZAuxvK4UWHlsB9sUOTJQaGAlLPVAhM__XJesCHxLISo94z5Z2a463gA
    C7HRFPF3BLGF3YR4DY5KX3SMBE    86900   IN    TXT   enrtree://AM5FCQLWIZX2QFPNJAP7VUERCCRNGRHWZG3YYHIUV7BVDQ5FDPRT2@morenodes.example.org
    JWXYDBPXYWG6FX3GMDIBFA6CJ4    86900   IN    TXT   enrtree-branch:2XS2367YHAXJFGLZHVAWLQD4ZY,H4FHT4B454P6UXFD7JCYQ5PWDY,MHTDO6TMUBRIA2XWG5LUDACK24
    2XS2367YHAXJFGLZHVAWLQD4ZY    86900   IN    TXT   enr:-HW4QOFzoVLaFJnNhbgMoDXPnOvcdVuj7pDpqRvh6BRDO68aVi5ZcjB3vzQRZH2IcLBGHzo8uUN3snqmgTiE56CH3AMBgmlkgnY0iXNlY3AyNTZrMaECC2_24YYkYHEgdzxlSNKQEnHhuNAbNlMlWJxrJxbAFvA
    H4FHT4B454P6UXFD7JCYQ5PWDY    86900   IN    TXT   enr:-HW4QAggRauloj2SDLtIHN1XBkvhFZ1vtf1raYQp9TBW2RD5EEawDzbtSmlXUfnaHcvwOizhVYLtr7e6vw7NAf6mTuoCgmlkgnY0iXNlY3AyNTZrMaECjrXI8TLNXU0f8cthpAMxEshUyQlK-AM0PW2wfrnacNI
    MHTDO6TMUBRIA2XWG5LUDACK24    86900   IN    TXT   enr:-HW4QLAYqmrwllBEnzWWs7I5Ev2IAs7x_dZlbYdRdMUx5EyKHDXp7AV5CkuPGUPdvbv1_Ms1CPfhcGCvSElSosZmyoqAgmlkgnY0iXNlY3AyNTZrMaECriawHKWdDRk2xeZkrOXBQ0dfMFLHY4eENZwdufn1S1o

### Client Protocol

To find nodes at a given DNS name, say "mynodes.org":

1. Resolve the TXT record of the name and check whether it contains a valid
   "enrtree-root=v1" entry. Let's say the `enr-root` hash contained in the entry
   is "CFZUWDU7JNQR4VTCZVOJZ5ROV4".
2. Verify the signature on the root against the known public key and check
   whether the sequence number is larger than or equal to any previous number
   seen for that name.
3. Resolve the TXT record of the hash subdomain, e.g.
   "CFZUWDU7JNQR4VTCZVOJZ5ROV4.mynodes.org" and verify whether the content
   matches the hash.
4. The next step depends on the entry type found:
   - for `enrtree-branch`: parse the list of hashes and continue resolving them (step 3).
   - for `enr`: decode, verify the node record and import it to local node storage.

During traversal, the client must track hashes and domains which are already
resolved to avoid going into an infinite loop. It's in the client's best
interest to traverse the tree in random order.

Client implementations should avoid downloading the entire tree at once during
normal operation. It's much better to request entries via DNS when-needed, i.e.
at the time when the client is looking for peers.

## Rationale

### Why DNS?

We have chosen DNS as the distribution medium because it is always available,
even under restrictive network conditions. The protocol provides low latency and
answers to DNS queries can be cached by intermediate resolvers. No custom server
software is needed. Node lists can be deployed to any DNS provider such as
CloudFlare DNS, dnsimple, Amazon Route 53 using their respective client
libraries.

### Why is this a merkle tree?

Being a merkle tree, any node list can be authenticated by a single signature on
the root. Hash subdomains protect the integrity of the list. At worst
intermediate resolvers can block access to the list or disallow updates to it,
but cannot corrupt its content. The sequence number prevents replacing the root
with an older version.

Synchronizing updates on the client side can be done incrementally, which
matters for large lists. Individual entries of the tree are small enough to fit
into a single UDP packet, ensuring compatibility with environments where only
basic UDP DNS is available. The tree format also works well with caching
resolvers: only the root of the tree needs a short TTL. Intermediate entries and
leaves can be cached for days.

### Why does the link subtree exist?

Links between lists enable federation and web-of-trust functionality. The
operator of a large list can delegate maintenance to other list providers. If
two node lists link to each other, users can use either list and get nodes from
both.

The link subtree is separate from the tree containing ENRs. This is done to
enable client implementations to sync these trees independently. A client
wanting to get as many nodes as possible will sync the link tree first and add
all linked names to the sync horizon.

## Security Considerations

Discovery via DNS is less secure than via DHT, because it relies on a trusted
party to publish the records regularly. The actor could easily eclipse
bootstrapping nodes by only publishing node records that it controls.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
