---
eip: 2304
title: Multichain address resolution for ENS
author: Nick Johnson <nick@ens.domains>
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
status: Draft
created: 2019-09-09
discussions-to: https://discuss.ens.domains/t/new-standard-proposal-ens-multicoin-support/1148
requires: 137
---

## Abstract

This EIP introduces new overloads for the the `addr` field for ENS resolvers, which permit resolution of addresses for other blockchains via ENS.

## Motivation

With the increasing uptake of ENS by multi-coin wallets, wallet authors have requested the ability to resolve addresses for non-Ethereum chains inside ENS. This specification standardises a way to enter and retrieve these addresses in a cross-client fashion.

## Specification

A new accessor function for resolvers is specified:

```

function addr(bytes32 node, uint coinType) external view returns(bytes memory);
```

The EIP165 interface ID for this function is 0xf1cb7e06.

When called on a resolver, this function must return the cryptocurrency address for the specified namehash and coin type. A zero-length string must be returned if the specified coin ID does not exist on the specified node.

`coinType` is the cryptocurrency coin type index from [SLIP44](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md).

The return value is the cryptocurency address in its native binary format. Detailed descriptions of the binary encodings for several popular chains are provided in the Address Encoding section below.

A new event for resolvers is defined:

```
event AddressChanged(bytes32 indexed node, uint coinType, bytes newAddress);
```

Resolvers MUST emit this event on each change to the address for a name and coin type.

### Recommended accessor functions

The following function provides the recommended interface for changing the addresses stored for a node. Resolvers SHOULD implement this interface for setting addresses unless their needs dictate a different interface.

```
function setAddr(bytes32 node, uint coinType, bytes calldata addr);
```

`setAddr` adds or replaces the address for the given node and coin type.  The parameters for this function are as per those described in `addr()` above.

This function emits an `AddressChanged` event with the new address; see also the backwards compatibility section below for resolvers that also support `addr(bytes32)`.

### Address Encoding

In general, the native binary representation of the address should be used, without any checksum commonly used in the text representation.

A table of encodings for common blockchains is provided, followed by a more detailed description of each format. In the table, 'Format' describes the encoding used to represent the bytes in text format, 'Decoded' describes the result of decoding this format, and 'On ENS' describes how this should be stored in ENS as bytes.

| Cryptocurrency | Format | Decoded | On ENS |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Ethereum | hex-checksum | `<20 byte hash>` | `<20 byte hash>` |
| Bitcoin | base58check | `0x00 <20 byte hash>` | `0x76a914 <20 byte hash> 0x88ac` |
| Bitcoin | base58check | `0x05 <20 byte hash>` | `0xa914 <20 byte hash> 0x87` |
| Bitcoin | bech32 | `<witness version> <witness program>` | `<OP_n> <PUSH_m> <witness program>` |
| Binance | bech32 | `<public key hash>` | `<public key hash>` |

#### Ethereum

To translate a text format Ethereum address into binary format, simply remove the '0x' prefix and hex decode it. `0x314159265dD8dbb310642f98f50C066173C1259b` is hex-decoded and stored as the 20 bytes `314159265dd8dbb310642f98f50c066173c1259b`.

Before decoding, the [EIP 55](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-55) address checksum must be checked. Addresses with invalid checksums that are not all uppercase or all lowercase MUST be rejected with an error. Implementations may choose whether to accept non-checksummed addresses, but the authors recommend at least providing a warning to users in this situation.

When encoding an address from binary to text, an [EIP 55](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-55) checksum MUST be used - so the correct encoding of the above address is `0x314159265dD8dbb310642f98f50C066173C1259b`.

#### Bitcoin

Bitcoin addresses are encoded as the scriptPubkey for the address. Common Bitcoin addressing formats are encoded and decoded as follows:

##### P2PKH and P2SH

Pay to Public Key Hash and Pay To Script Hash addresses are [base58check](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Base58Check_encoding) encoded. After decoding, the first byte is a version byte. For example, the Bitcoin address `1A1zP1eP5QGefi2DMPTfTL5SLmv7DivfNa` base58check decodes to the 21 bytes `0062e907b15cbf27d5425399ebf6f0fb50ebb88f18`.

P2PKH addresses have a version byte of 0, followed by a 20 byte pubkey hash. Their scriptPubkey encoding (specified [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Transaction#Types_of_Transaction)) is `OP_DUP OP_HASH160 <pubKeyHash> OP_EQUALVERIFY OP_CHECKSIG`.

The above example address is thus encoded as the 25 bytes `76a91462e907b15cbf27d5425399ebf6f0fb50ebb88f1888ac`.

P2SH addresses have a version byte of 5, followed by a 20 byte script hash. Their scriptPubkey encoding (specified [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Transaction#Pay-to-Script-Hash)) is `OP_HASH160 <scriptHash> OP_EQUAL`. A Bitcoin address of `3Ai1JZ8pdJb2ksieUV8FsxSNVJCpoPi8W6` decodes to the 21 bytes `0562e907b15cbf27d5425399ebf6f0fb50ebb88f18` and is encoded as the 23 bytes `a91462e907b15cbf27d5425399ebf6f0fb50ebb88f1887`.

##### SegWit addresses

SegWit addresses are encoded with [bech32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki). Bech32 addresses consist of a human-readable part - 'bc' for Bitcoin mainnet - and a machine readable part. This decodes to a 'witness version', between 0 and 15, and a 'witness program', as defined in [BIP141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki).

The scriptPubkey encoding for a bech32 address, as defined in BIP141, is `OP_n`, where `n` is the witness version, followed by a push of the witness program. Note this warning from BIP173:

> Implementations should take special care when converting the address to a scriptPubkey, where witness version n is stored as OP_n. OP_0 is encoded as 0x00, but OP_1 through OP_16 are encoded as 0x51 though 0x60 (81 to 96 in decimal). If a bech32 address is converted to an incorrect scriptPubKey the result will likely be either unspendable or insecure.

For example, the SegWit address `BC1QW508D6QEJXTDG4Y5R3ZARVARY0C5XW7KV8F3T4` decodes to a version of `0` and a witness script of `751e76e8199196d454941c45d1b3a323f1433bd6`, and then encodes to a scriptPubkey of `0014751e76e8199196d454941c45d1b3a323f1433bd6`.

#### Binance Chain (BNB)

Binance addresses are encoded in bech32, with the human-readable prefix 'bnb'. The encoded data is simply the address, which can be converted to binary and stored directly.

For example, the BNB address `bnb1grpf0955h0ykzq3ar5nmum7y6gdfl6lxfn46h2` decodes to the binary representation `40c2979694bbc961023d1d27be6fc4d21a9febe6`, which is stored directly in ENS.

### Example

An example implementation of a resolver that supports this EIP is provided here:

```
pragma solidity ^0.5.8;

contract AddrResolver is ResolverBase {
    bytes4 constant private ADDR_INTERFACE_ID = 0x3b3b57de;
    bytes4 constant private ADDRESS_INTERFACE_ID = 0xf1cb7e06;
    uint constant private COIN_TYPE_ETH = 60;

    event AddrChanged(bytes32 indexed node, address a);
    event AddressChanged(bytes32 indexed node, uint coinType, bytes newAddress);

    mapping(bytes32=>mapping(uint=>bytes)) _addresses;

    /**
     * Sets the address associated with an ENS node.
     * May only be called by the owner of that node in the ENS registry.
     * @param node The node to update.
     * @param a The address to set.
     */
    function setAddr(bytes32 node, address a) external authorised(node) {
        setAddr(node, COIN_TYPE_ETH, addressToBytes(a));
    }

    /**
     * Returns the address associated with an ENS node.
     * @param node The ENS node to query.
     * @return The associated address.
     */
    function addr(bytes32 node) public view returns (address) {
        bytes memory a = addr(node, COIN_TYPE_ETH);
        if(a.length == 0) {
            return address(0);
        }
        return bytesToAddress(a);
    }

    function setAddr(bytes32 node, uint coinType, bytes memory a) public authorised(node) {
        emit AddressChanged(node, coinType, a);
        if(coinType == COIN_TYPE_ETH) {
            emit AddrChanged(node, bytesToAddress(a));
        }
        _addresses[node][coinType] = a;
    }

    function addr(bytes32 node, uint coinType) public view returns(bytes memory) {
        return _addresses[node][coinType];
    }

    function supportsInterface(bytes4 interfaceID) public pure returns(bool) {
        return interfaceID == ADDR_INTERFACE_ID || interfaceID == ADDRESS_INTERFACE_ID || super.supportsInterface(interfaceID);
    }
}
```

### Implementation

An implementation of this interface is provided in the [ensdomains/resolvers](https://github.com/ensdomains/resolvers/) repository.

## Backwards Compatibility

If the resolver supports the `addr(bytes32)` interface defined in EIP137, the resolver MUST treat this as a special case of this new specification in the following ways:

 1. The value returned by `addr(node)` from EIP137 should always match the value returned by `addr(node, 60)` (60 is the coin type ID for Ethereum).
 2. Anything that causes the `AddrChanged` event from EIP137 to be emitted must also emit an `AddressChanged` event from this EIP, with the `coinType` specified as 60, and vice-versa.

## Tests

The table below specifies test vectors for valid address encodings for each cryptocurrency described above.

| Cryptocurrency | Text | Onchain (hex) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Ethereum | `0x314159265dD8dbb310642f98f50C066173C1259b` | `314159265dd8dbb310642f98f50c066173c1259b` |
| Bitcoin | `1A1zP1eP5QGefi2DMPTfTL5SLmv7DivfNa` | `76a91462e907b15cbf27d5425399ebf6f0fb50ebb88f1888ac` |
| Bitcoin | `3Ai1JZ8pdJb2ksieUV8FsxSNVJCpoPi8W6` | `a91462e907b15cbf27d5425399ebf6f0fb50ebb88f1887` |
| Bitcoin | `BC1QW508D6QEJXTDG4Y5R3ZARVARY0C5XW7KV8F3T4` | `0014751e76e8199196d454941c45d1b3a323f1433bd6` |
| Binance | `bnb1grpf0955h0ykzq3ar5nmum7y6gdfl6lxfn46h2` | `40c2979694bbc961023d1d27be6fc4d21a9febe6` |

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
