---
eip: 5219
title: Decentralized HTTP
description: Allows the sending of HTTP-like requests to smart contracts
author: Pandapip1 (@Pandapip1)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/pr-5219-discussion-decentralized-http/9907
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-07-10
requires: 20, 137, 165, 4834
---

## Abstract

Ethereum is the most-established blockchain for building decentralized applications (referred to as `DApp`s). Due to this, the Ethereum DApp ecosystem is very diverse. However, one issue that plagues DApps is the fact that they are not fully decentralized. Specifically, to interface a "decentralized" application, one first needs to access a *centralized* website containing the DApp's front-end code, presenting a few issues (discussed in the Motivation). To solve these issues, this EIP introduces an interface allowing "Web3 Browsers" to make HTTP-like requests (containing a method, a resource to request, a request body, and headers) to smart contracts, and to receive HTTP-like responses (containing headers and a body).

## Motivation

As mentioned in the Abstract, DApps being partially centralized is problematic. The following are some risks associated with using centralized websites to interface with decentralized applications:

- Trust Minimization: An unnecessarily large number of entities need to be trusted
- Censorship: A centralized website is not resistant to being censored
- Permanence: The interface may not have a mechanism that permits it to be permanently stored
- Interoperability: Smart Contracts cannot directly interact with DApp interfaces
  
## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

### Name Resolution

It is RECOMMENDED for Web3 browsers implementing this EIP to recognize the following standards:

| Name                          | Specification                                        |
| ---                           | ---                                                  |
| [EIP-137](./eip-137.md) (ENS) | See [EIP-137](./eip-137.md#Resolver-specification)   |
| [EIP-4834](./eip-4834.md)     | See [EIP-4834](./eip-4834.md#Specification)          |

**Changes to this list:** This list MAY be appended to even when this EIP becomes final. New additions should be made at the bottom of the list.

Web3 browsers MAY also support regular DNS, as defined in RFC 1034 and RFC 1035.

In the case of a naming conflict, it is RECOMMENDED to prefer the standard that appears first in the list. (Regular DNS should be treated as the last item in the list.)

### Separation of Concerns

It is RECOMMENDED to separate the application logic (such as an [EIP-20](./eip-20.md) token) from the front-end logic (the contract implementing the interface defined in [Contract Interface](#contract-interface)).

### Contract Interface

DApp contracts MUST implement the interface defined in the following file: [Contract Interface](../assets/eip-5219/IDecentralizedApp.sol).

In addition, DApp contracts MUST implement [EIP-165](./eip-165.md).

## Rationale

The `request` method was chosen to be readonly because all data should be sent to the contract from the parsed DApp. Here are some reasons why:

- Submitting a transaction to send a request would be costly and would require waiting for the transaction to be mined, resulting in quite possibly the worst user-experience possible.
- Complicated front-end logic should not be stored in the smart contract, as it would be costly to deploy and would be better ran on the end-user's machine.
- Separation of Concerns: the front-end contract shouldn't have to worry about interacting with the back-end smart contract.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP is backwards compatible with all standards listed in the [Name Resolution](#name-resolution) section.

## Security Considerations

Needs discussion.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
