---
eip: 5516
title: Soulbound, Multi-Token Standard.
description: An interface for non-transferrable NFTs binding to an Ethereum account for standardized blockchain-based academic certification.
author: Lucas Martín Grasso Ramos (@LucasGrasso), Matias Arazi (@MatiArazi)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/EIP-5516-soulbound-multi-token-standard/10485
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-08-19
requires: 165, 1155
---

## Abstract

This is a standard interface for non fungible, double signature, multi-token, Soulbound Tokens. It was inspired by the main characteristics of the EIP-1155 token and by articles in which benefits and potential use-cases of Soulbound/Accountbound Tokens(SBTs) were presented.

## Motivation

Current Soulbound/Accountbound token standards like EIP-4973 face the potential issue of the user losing their account keys or having them rotated, therefore losing their bound to the SBTs. This EIP-1555 inspired interface design provides a solution to this issue and also allows for a recycling of SBTs: minting of NFTs with the same characteristics for it being transferred to different addresses is no longer neccesary.
This design also allows for multiple token types to be transferred at once, saving on transaction costs. Trading of multiple tokens can be built on top of this standard and it removes the need to “approve” individual token contracts separately.
It is also easy to describe and mix multiple fungible or non-fungible token types in a single contract.

The purpose of this document is to create a Double-Signature SBT standard by creating consensus around a maximally EIP-1555 compatible interface definition. 

### Characteristics
* The NFT will be non-transferable after the initial transfer(Soulbound/Accountbound Token-SBT).
* Backwards compatible with EIP-1155.
* Double Signature.
* Multi-Token.
* Multi-Owned.
* Semi-Fungible.

### Applications
* EIP-1155 Soulbound NFTs.
* Academy.
* Certifications.
* Smart Contract certifications (Code auditories).
* POAP.
* And more...

## Specification
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

**Smart contracts implementing this EIP MUST implement all of the functions in the `EIP-5516` interface.**

**Smart contracts implementing this EIP MUST implement the [EIP-165](./EIP-165.md) `supportsInterface` function and and MUST return the constant value `true` if `0xa60dce19` is passed through the `interfaceID` argument. They also MUST implement the EIP-1155 Interface and MUST return the constant value `true` if `0xd9b67a26` is passed through the `interfaceID` argument. Furthermore, they MUST implement the EIP-1155 Metadata interface, and MUST return the constant value `true` if `0x0e89341c` is passed through the `interfaceID` argument.**

_See [EIP-1155](./EIP-1155.md#specification)_

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0

pragma solidity ^0.8.4;

/**
    @title Soulbound, Multi-Token standard.
    @notice Interface of the EIP-5516 
    Note: The ERC-165 identifier for this interface is 0xa60dce19.
 */

interface IEIP5516 {
    
    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `newOwner` claims or rejects pending tokens under `ids.
     */
    event TokenClaimed(address indexed operator, bool[] indexed actions, uint256[] indexed ids);

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `from` transfers token under `id` to every address at `to[]`.
     */
    event TransferMulti(address indexed from, address[] indexed to, uint256 amount, uint256 indexed id);

    /**
     * @dev Get tokens owned by a given address
     */
    function tokensFrom(address from) external view returns (uint256[] memory);

    /**
     * @dev Get tokens marked as pending of a given address
     */
    function pendingFrom(address from) external view returns (uint256[] memory);
    
    /**
     * @dev Claims or Reject pending `_id` from address `_account`.
     *
     * Requirements:
     * - `account` cannot be the zero address.
     * - `account` MUST have a pending token under `id` at the moment of call.
     * - `account` MUST not own a token under `id` at the moment of call.
     *
     * Emits a {TokenClaimed} event.
     *
     */
    function claimOrReject(uint256 id, bool actions) external;

    /**
     * For each `id` `action` pair
     *  @dev Claims or Reject pending `_id` from address `_account`.
     *
     *  Requirements:
     *  - `account` cannot be the zero address.
     *  - `account` MUST have a pending token under `id` at the moment of call.
     *  - `account` MUST not own a token under `id` at the moment of call.
     *
     * Emits a {TokenClaimed} event.
     *
     */
    function claimOrRejectBatch(uint256[] memory ids, bool[] memory actions) external;



    /**
     * @dev Transfers `_id` token from `_from` to every address at `_to[]`.
     *
     * Requirements:
     *
     * - `_from` MUST be the creator(minter) of `id`.
     * - All addresses in `to[]` MUST be non-zero.
     * - All addresses in `to[]` MUST have the token `id` under `_pendings`.
     * - All addresses in `to[]` MUST not own a token type under `id`.
     *
     * Emits a {TransfersMulti} event.
     *
     */
    function batchTransfer (address from, address[] memory to, uint256 id, uint256 amount, bytes memory data) external;

}
```

## Rationale

### SBT as an extension to EIP-1155
We believe that Soulbound Token serves as a specialized subset of the existing EIP-1155 tokens. The advantage of such design is seamless compatibility of Soulbound Token with existing NFT services. Service providers can treat SBTs like NFTs and do not need to make drastic changes to their existing codebase.
Making the standard compatible with EIP-1155 also allows for SBT binding to Smart Contracts, and this can allow for a whole new world of possibilities.

### Double-Signature
The Double-Signature functionality was implemented to prevent the receival of unwanted tokens. It symbolizes a handshake between token receiver and token sender, implying that **both** parties agree on the token transfer.

### Metadata.
The EIP-1155 Metadata Interface was implemented for more compatibility with EIP-1155.   

_See [EIP-1155](./EIP-1155.md#metadata)_ 

### Guaranteed log trace
>As the Ethereum ecosystem continues to grow, many dapps are relying on traditional databases and explorer API services to retrieve and categorize data. The ERC-1155 standard guarantees that event logs emitted by the smart contract will provide enough data to create an accurate record of all current token balances. A database or explorer may listen to events and be able to provide indexed and categorized searches of every ERC-1155 token in the contract.

_quoted from [EIP-1555](./EIP-1155.md#guaranteed-log-trace)_

This EIP extends this idea to the Double Signature functionality: The `{TokenClaimed}` event logs all the necessary information of a `ClaimOrReject(...)` or `ClaimOrRejectBatch(...)` function call, storing relevant information about the actions performed by the user. This also applies to the `batchTransfer(...)` function: It emits the `{TransferMulti}` event and logs necessary data.

### Exception handling
Given the non-transferability property of SBTs, if a user’s keys to an account or a contract get compromised or rotated, a user may lose the ability to associate themselves with the token.
**Given the multi owner characteristic of EIP-1555 compliant interfaces and contracts, this allows for SBTs to bind to multiple accounts, providing for a potential solution to the issue.**  

Multi-owned SBTs can also be issued to a contract account that implements a multi-signature functionality (As recommended in [EIP-4973](./EIP-4973.md#exeption-handling)), this can be achieved via the [EIP-1155](./EIP-1155.md#erc-1155-token-receiver) Token Receiver interface.

### Multi token
The multi token functionality was used in order to ease organization, all emitted tokens are stored in the same contract, preventing redundant bytecode from being deployed to the blockchain. It also facilitates transfer to token issuers, given that all issued tokens are stored and can be accessed under the same address. It it also easy to implement non-fungible and semi-fungible tokens in the same contract.

### batchTransfer(...) function
The token standard supports a batch transfer function to multiple addresses, and this was made to ease the transfer to multiple people, making it more gas-efficient and easier for the users.

## Backwards Compatibility
This proposal is fully backward compatible with EIP-1155.

## Reference Implementation

You can find an implementation of this standard in [../assets/EIP-5516](../assets/EIP-5516/ERC5516.sol).

## Security Considerations
There are no security considerations related directly to the implementation of this standard.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).