---
eip: 3369
title: Apply minor modifications to the Ethash algorithm to break current ASIC implementations
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
author: mineruniter969 (@mineruniter969), mineruniter969 <mineruniter969@tutanota.com>
created: 2021-03-13
---

# Simple Summary

Introduce 5 new FNV primes into the ethash algorithm.

# Abstract

This EIP is to kick current ASIC implementations out of the network to keep the Ethereum network secure and healthy.

# Motivation

ASICs provide a severe centralization risk for the Ethereum network. If we do not get rid of them, small GPU miners will be forced to exit the Ethereum mining because EIP-1559 will make them mining at a loss. Furthermore, ASIC production will be concentrated only at one or two parties, which will make the Ethereum hashrate centralized. Also, it is worth noting that Ethash ASIC machines cost 10k+ USD, while GPUs are priced less than 1000 USD.

With GPUs, miners can switch to other mining algorithms, but with ASICs, it is impossible. Leaving everything as-is will almost certainly a very tough (from the side of miners) integration of the Ethereum 2.0.

In short, this EIP is required to keep the Ethereum network stable and decentralized by keeping the ASIC business away.

# Specification

If `block.number >= ETHASH11_BLKNUM`, activate the `ethash1.1` algorithm version.

## ethash1.1

Right now, `fnv` hash function is used throughout the `hashimoto` function. `fnv` is identical for all steps, `ethash1.1` will introduce additional `fnvA`, `fnvB`, `fnvC`, `fnvD`, and `fnvE` functions. All those functions will have different FNV constants.

```c
// Previously used FNV prime
#define FNV_PRIME_0 0x1000193

// New FNV primes
#define FNV_PRIME_A 0x10001a7
#define FNV_PRIME_B 0x10001ab
#define FNV_PRIME_C 0x10001cf
#define FNV_PRIME_D 0x10001e3
#define FNV_PRIME_E 0x10001f9
```

Right now, all parts of Ethash are using the `fnv` (hereinafter referenced as `fnv0`) function. This EIP proposes a change in this area. `fnvA` replaces fnv in the DAG item selection step; `fnvB` replaces `fnv0` in the DAG item mix step; `fnvC(fnvD(fnvE` replaces `fnv0(fnv0(fnv0(` in the compress mix step. `fnv0` in the DAG generation step should remain unchanged to keep previous DAGs valid.

# Backwards compatibility

Mining hardware that is optimized for ethash may no longer work if the `fnv` constants are baked into the hardware and cannot be changed.

# Implementations

- [Go](https://github.com/mineruniter969/ethash1.1-go)
- [C (Python/JS wrapped)](https://github.com/mineruniter969/ethash1.1-c)
- Ethminer - TBD

# Test Vectors

See [mineruniter969/ethash1.1-tests](https://github.com/mineruniter969/ethash1.1-tests)

# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
