---

eip: 7092
title: Financial Bonds
description: A standard for representing debt issued by entities to investors on the Ethereum blockchain.
author: Samuel Gwlanold Edoumou (@Edoumou)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/financial-bonds/14461
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-05-28

---

## Abstract

This proposal introduces fixed-income financial bonds with key characteristics defined to facilitate bond issuance in the primary market and enable buying or selling bonds in the secondary market.

## Motivation

Fixed-income instruments are a widely utilized asset class for corporations and other entities raising funds. However, transitioning to tokenized bonds is challenging due to existing standards like [ERC-3475](./eip-3475.md), which introduces unfamiliar concepts and leads to unnecessary gas consumption. Additionally, the lack of named variables like coupon, maturity date, and principal, makes it difficult to implement ERC-3475 since developers need to remember which metadata is assigned to each parameter.

## Specification

The key words "MUST," "MUST NOT," "REQUIRED," "SHALL," "SHALL NOT," "SHOULD," "SHOULD NOT," "RECOMMENDED," "NOT RECOMMENDED," "MAY," and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

**Every contract compliant with this ERC MUST implement the following interface:**

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

/**
* @title ERC-7092 Financial Bonds Standard
*/
interface IERC7092 {
    // Interface code...
}
```

## Rationale

The design of this ERC aims to simplify the migration to tokenized bonds by maintaining consistency with traditional bond standards. This approach allows fixed-income instruments to be represented as on-chain tokens, manageable through wallets, and utilized by applications like decentralized exchanges, while avoiding the complexities and inefficiencies associated with other standards. This ERC facilitates the creation of new bond tokens with characteristics akin to traditional bonds, enhancing accessibility, liquidity, and cost-efficiency in bond trading and management.

The use of traditional finance terminology, like `issueVolume` and `principalOf`, is aimed at maintaining consistency with traditional bond language, which eases the adaptation for traditional entities.

### Total Supply and Account Balance

The `totalSupply` and `balanceOf` functions are not defined as they can be derived from `issueVolume` and `principalOf`, and `denomination`. However, it's RECOMMENDED to define these functions in any contract implementing this standard, ensuring the proper relationship between these values.

```javascript
    totalSupply = issueVolume / denomination
    balanceOf(account) = principalOf(account) / denomination
```

## Backwards Compatibility

This ERC SHOULD NOT extend existing standards like [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) or [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) due to the absence of certain functions like `totalSupply` or `balanceOf`. A pure implementation of this standard is RECOMMENDED for issuing tokenized bonds, as any hybrid solution with other mentioned standards SHOULD fail.

## Reference Implementation

Bonds with embedded options like callable, puttable, or convertible bonds can be created by inheriting from the basic ERC-7092 that integrates the proposed interface.

## Security Considerations

Implementing this ERC requires careful consideration of security risks related to functions approving operators to manage owner's bonds and functions allowing bond transfers. Functions `transferAll` and `transferAllFrom` permit transferring the entire balance of an account, necessitating robust validation to ensure only the bond owner or approved accounts can call these functions.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
