

| eip  | title                                  | description                                                                  | author                                                     | discussions-to | status | type            | category | created    | requires |
| ---- | -------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | -------------- | ------ | --------------- | -------- | ---------- | -------- |
| 4966 | Authorization standard based on ERC721 | NFT owners can authorize other users to use their NFTs for business purpose. | VeegaLabs Official (@VeegaLabs100), <kccinfo100@gmail.com> | #4966          | Draft  | Standards Track | ERC      | 2021-08-15 | 721      |



## Abstract

1. By registering and confirming ownership and other commercial rights independently on the chain, it supports the independent circulation of commercial authorization. Thereby the users will get more benefits in addition to selling, and it will significantly motivate users in various ways.
2. After separating the ownership of assets and other commercial rights, the information of full authorization chain will be saved by smart contracts, and the benefits of commercial users will be protected by smart contracts on the blockchain, and would not be affected by the changes of ownership.
3. The cryptocurrency paid by the users will be hosted and locked in the smart contract, and the "authorized funds" will be dynamically unlocked to asset owners based on how long the assets being used. 

## Motivation

The development of NFT has simplified the ownership verification and transaction. However, other kinds of rights except ownership such as exhibition rights, lease rights, creation of derivatives etc. are still difficult to be circulated and used independently, which have limited the value and commercialization of digital assets.

As the development of the Metaverse, digital assets are diverse on the blockchain such as digital collections, virtual real estate, and commercial copyrights etc.,  the commercial rights (exhibition rights, derivative rights, commercial authorization, etc.) based on digital assets are becoming a potential business form. 

After separating the ownership of assets and other commercial rights, other problems will be raised. For example, when the ownership changes, at the same time the commercial authorization is still valid, it will result the conflict interest between the new owner and the commercial authorization user. It is extremely important thing how to protect the interests of both parties.

## Specification

This EIP is to completely separate the ownership of NFT and the usage rights to help the commercialization of NFT.

```solidity
struct UserRecord {
address user;
 uint expires
}

// The total users of every single NFT can be authorized to set by creators
uint256 userLimit = 5;

//The starting time of staking
mapping(uint256 => uint) timeOfStaking;

//if resetAllowed == false£¬the authorization can be revoked; otherwise, it cannot be revoked. 
bool resetAllowed = false;

// Mapping tokenID to user amount
mapping(uint256 => uint256) private _userAmount;

//Store the authorized users and their expire time
mappint(uint256 => mapping (uint => UserRecord)) expires;

//Store the index of users authorization
mappint(uint256 => mapping (address => uint)) _userTokensIndex;

//NFT creators can set the starting time of the staking
function stakingTimeUpdate(address[] user, uint[] stakingTime) external;

//Update userLimit and resetAllowed
function userLimitAndresetAllowedUpdate(uint256 limit, bool allowed) external onlyOwner;

/**
 * @dev Authorize the usage of the token(the owner or approver).
 * @param tokenId The token ID.
 * @param user The address that should use the token.
 * @param duration Durations in seconds for the authorization.
*/

// NFT Owner authorize NFT to users.
function userAuthorization(uint256 tokenId, address user, uint duration) external returns(uint) 

// NFT Owner extends the duration of authorization 
function durationUpdate(uint256 tokenId, address user, uint duration) external returns(uint)

// Get the times of expired for one specific tokenId and user.
function userExpiresTime(uint256 tokenId, address user) external view returns(uint) 

// Check if the token is available for authorization.
function authorizationAvailabilityCheck (uint256 tokenId) public view returns(bool) 

/**
@dev Reset the user registration record of the tokenId, if you own the tokenId.
*/

//Clear authorization records
function resetUser(uint256 tokenId, address user) external;

event userAuthorization(uint256 indexed tokenID, address indexed user, uint expires);

event userAuthorizationUpdate(uint256 indexed id, uint expires);
```

## Rationale

By separating every single NFT's ownership and user rights to maximize its utilities and therefore enhance its commercial value. 

First of all, NFT Creator can set the maximum number of authorized users of each NFT, the authorization period and whether the NFT holder can cancel the authorization at any time, so as to define the NFT¡¯s fundamental authorization and protect interests of all roles according to the project.

Secondly, this EIP combines staking and authorization then the NFT creator can set the number of users that the NFT owner can authorize according to the staking period of time of each NFT. For example, if a NFT owner stakes his NFT for one year, he can obtain the maximum number of authorized users specified by userLimited. If he stakes his NFT for half a year, he can only authorize 2 or 3 users, so as to avoid the hype of NFT to a certain extent and maximize every single NFT¡¯s value. 

In addition, this design can be seamlessly integrated with third parties. (1) It is completely based on ERC721 extensions, developers can easily use all interfaces based on existing code (2) other projects can directly interact with these interface and functions to implement their own type of transactions. For example, a Lavender Bear's announcement platform can use this agreement to allow all its NFT holders to authorize their partners and also allow them to activate or terminate the authorization at any time to better manage partners.

## Backwards Compatibility

This standard will be completely EIP-721 compatible by adding an extension function set.  All the interfaces and functions are easy for developer to understand and adopted.

## Security Considerations

There is a flag to control the rights between the owner and the user. The owner can cancel the authorization at anytime if the flag is true, and can NOT cancel the authorization when it comes to false.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via CC0.
