---
eip: 7505
title: NFT Author Registry
description: Registry for cryptographically secured NFT art author attribution.
author: pistomat (@pistomat), Jan Kolar <jan@rc.xyz>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7505-nft-author-registry/15584
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-05-11
requires: 55, 155, 712, 721, 1155, 1271, 2098
---

## Abstract

This EIP describes the details of the NFT Author Registry, a proposed protocol that provides a backwards compatible way to claim the authorship of an NFT token or contract with a cryptographically secured signature. Note that this is not a proof of authorship, but a way to claim authorship.

## Motivation

Currently, there is no standard method for identifying the authors of NFTs. While in some cases the deployer of the contract is regarded as the author (e.g., Manifold), on other platforms, the individual who mints the token is considered the author (e.g., SuperRare). Moreover, with lazy minting, the author's address might not be used at all, as seen in OpenSea's Shared Storefront. A significant portion of this artwork lacks clear authorship attribution, making discovery and aggregation challenging.

Our EIP aims to provide a backwards compatible single source of data that is easily indexable on-chain and off-chain and can be extended to handle attribution accross multiple platforms and chains.

## Specification

This document defines `author` as the creator of the digital asset that is being tokenized, for example a work of art, a piece of music, a video, or any other type of digital content. This entity may or may not be the deployer of the NFT contract and/or the minter of the NFT token.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

All addresses used in this standard MUST follow the casing rules described in [ERC-55](./eip-55.md).

### Signing Mechanism

The core signing mechanism follows the [EIP-712](./eip-712.md), [ERC-1271](./eip-1271.md) and [ERC-2098](./eip-2098.md) standards.

The struct signed is defined as follows:
    
```solidity
struct Signed {
    address author;
    address contractAddress;
    uint256 tokenId;
}
```

The `author` address must match the signature signer. The `contractAddress` and `tokenId` are the NFT contract address and token id of the NFT being claimed.

The domain separator structure is defined as follows:

```solidity
struct EIP712Domain {
    string name;
    string version;
    uint256 chainId;
    address verifyingContract;
}
```

The `chainId` MUST be the chain id of the chain where the NFT contract is deployed.

### Signature Validation

Author attribution is given through a signature verification that MUST be verified by the Registry contract on submitting a new attribution. An event MUST be emitted by the Registry contract on successful verification. The event name MUST be `AuthorAttribution` and the event MUST contain the following fields:

```solidity
event AuthorAttribution(
    bytes32 structHash,
    string domainName,
    string version,
    bytes32 signature
);
```

A platform can verify the validity of the author attribution by reconstructing the signature digest with the parameters emitted and recovering the signer from the signature parameter.

## Rationale

This proposal aims to create an open standard for author attribution that is easily discoverable and indexable off-chain by emitting events upon verification of the signature. Contrary to other proposals, namely [ERC-5375](./eip-5375.md), [ERC-7015](./eip-7015.md) and draft of 7050, this proposal does not in any way extend the [ERC-721](./eip-712.md) or [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) standards by introducing additional functions, events or JSON metadata fields, but rather designates a singleton contract for trusted verification of author signatures. This approach is more flexible and allows for easier adoption by existing NFT platforms, increases trust in author attribution by only requiring a single audited and therefore trusted contract and allows for easier indexing of author attribution off-chain.

### Tradeoffs of an external signature registry

#### Multiple authorship claimants

The approach of creating an external signature verification contract that is not dependent on the NFT contract itself has a significant tradeoff. It allows *any* address to claim authorship of a particular token and/or NFT contract by providing a valid signature. The question our protocol is trying to answer is therefore not:

```
Who is the author of this particular NFT token/contract?
```

but rather:

```
Does this artist claim to be the author of this particular NFT token/contract?
```

This change in perspective is important to understand our approach. We claim that in the NFT art space the source of trust and reputation is the artist themself and their public address, not the NFT contract.

#### Additional actions required by the author

Another limitation of our approach is that the author has to perform additional actions to claim authorship of their NFTs. This is a tradeoff we are willing to make as we believe that the benefits of having a single source of truth for author attribution outweigh the additional actions required by the author.

### Alternative proposals

We will now illustrate three previous proposals on a scenario with two identical NFT collections, one original and one a copy, and the collector has to determine the authenticity of the two collections.

#### NFT Author Information and Consent - [ERC-5375](./eip-5375.md)

This proposal introduces a new JSON field named `authorInfo` that contains among others the author's address and an EIP-712 signature. The collector can then verify the signature and succesfully determine the authenticity of the collection.

The problem with this approach is that the collector has to either manually extract and verify the signature of each token in the collection, which is a highly technical task, or rely on a third party that does this for them. Also this approach is not backwards compatible for contracts that do not allow to change the NFT metadata.

#### NFT Creator Attribution - [ERC-7015](./eip-7015.md)

This proposal requires the contract to emit and event upon deployment that contains an EIP-712 signature with information about the author. It specifies that the signature must be verified by the NFT contract being deployed.

The issue is that an adversarial NFT copy can also emit the same event, and although it will be an invalid signature, the collector is in risk of incorrectly assuming that the signature is valid (or else it would not be emitted per the EIP), leading them to believe that the collection is authentic. If they do not verify the signature themselves, they are in risk of being tricked by the copy.

#### NFT Creator Provenance - Draft of 7050

The last proposal is similar to the previous one, but instead of emitting an event upon deployment, the NFT contract is required to implement two functions, first for the author to claim authorship and the second for a collector to verify that the author proposed by the contract itself has claimed authorship.

Similar to the previous proposal, this approach is vulnerable to adversarial NFT copies. These copies can implement the same functions, potentially misleading the collector into believing that the collection is authentic. Even worse, the collector is now in position of combing through the proposed authors transaction for the one claiming the ownership of the token, as this info is not readily available in the contract and it is not a EIP-712 signature.

#### Our proposal

We try to mitigate all the previous issues by introducing an external canonical contract for author attribution verification. The contract will be audited and trusted by the community and will be the single source of truth for author attribution, thus not requiring additional trust assumptions for every new NFT collection. Also given that it is a singleton contract, an external NFT gallery or a marketplace can easily index all author attributions off-chain and by listening to the verification events emitted by the contract and filtering only trusted NFT artists.
 
## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal is fully backwards compatible with any ERC-721 and ERC-1155 contracts as it introduces a separate contract for author attribution verification. It does not require any changes to any existing contracts.

## Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is being currently developed.

## Security Considerations

### NFT forgeries and copies

As mentioned above, this proposal allows any address to claim to be the author of a particular token and/or NFT contract by providing a valid signature. 

### Phishing

A potential attack that exploits this proposal involves tricking authors into signing authorship consent messages against their wishes. For this reason, authors MUST verify that all signature fields match the required ones.

### Replay Attack Resistance

This proposal enables authors to claim to be the author of an NFT across chains by specifying the chain id. The chain id, the contract address and optionally the token id uniquely identify an NFT; for this reason, there is no need to implement additional replay attack countermeasures (e.g. a nonce system).

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
