---
eip: 7932
title: Secondary Signature Algorithms
description: Introduces a new transaction type and precompile for handling alternative signature algorithms
author: James Kempton (@SirSpudlington)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7932-secondary-signature-algorithms/23514
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2025-04-12
requires: 155, 6404, 6466, 6493, 7495, 7702, 7916
---


## Abstract

This EIP does three things:

 - Standardizes the introduction of several new algorithms for signing data.
 - Introduces a new [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md) transaction profile & [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) transaction type that can modify the signature data of a contained transaction to a different signature algorithm.
 - Introduces a precompile at address `0x12` for decoding these newly introduced algorithms.

## Motivation

As quantum computers become more advanced, several new post-quantum (PQ) algorithms have been designed. These algorithms all have certain issues, such as large key sizes (>1KiB), large signature sizes, or long verification times. These issues make them more expensive to compute and store than the currently used secp256k1 curve.

This EIP provides a solution to the diversity in algorithms by adding a standardized way to represent alternative algorithms within a transaction.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

Unless explicitly noted, integer encoding MUST be in big-endian format.

### Parameters

| Constant | Value |
| - | - |
| `MAX_ADDITIONAL_INFO` | `255` |
| `GAS_PER_ADDITIONAL_VERIFICATION_BYTE`| `16` |
| `SIGRECOVER_PRECOMPILE_ADDRESS`| `Bytes20(0x12)` |
| `SIGRECOVER_PRECOMPILE_BASE_GAS` | `3000` |
| `ALGORITHMIC_TX_TYPE` | `Bytes1(0x07)` |


`SECP256K1_SIGNATURE_SIZE` is defined in [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md).
`ExecutionAddress` is defined in [EIP-6466](./eip-6466.md).

### Algorithmic Transaction (RLP)

**This section is only applicable until [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md) and [EIP-6466](./eip-6466.md) have been included within a hard fork.**


A new [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) transaction is defined with a structure of:

```python

ALGORITHMIC_TX_TYPE || rlp([
  algorithm_type,       # uint8
  signature_info,       # Bytes
  tx_type,              # uint8
  tx_data,              # RLP encoded transaction data
  chain_id,             # uint256
  [
    [
      algorithm_type: uint8,
      signature_info: Bytes
    ],
    ...
  ]
])

```

The signing hash of the payload MUST be calculated with `keccak256(rlp([tx_type, tx_data, chain_id, additional_signatures]))`.

If a signature is being overridden via an `additional_signatures` entry, the `r` field MUST be set to `keccak256(rlp([algorithm_type, signature_info]))` and the `v` and `y_parity` values MUST be set to `0x0`. This MUST be verified during transaction validation. Each entry MUST NOT be of type `secp256k1`.

Each `additional_signatures` entry MUST be used at least once within the transaction and MUST not be duplicated. Non-used or duplicated entries will invalidate the tx. Entries MUST be sorted in ascending order (0x0 -> 0xff...ff) via `uint256(keccak256(rlp([algorithm_type, signature_info])))`.

The inner transaction MUST still contain the `r`, `s`, and `y_parity` which MUST be set to `0x0`.

It MUST also be checked that `len(additional_signatures)` <= `MAX_ADDITIONAL_INFO`

### Algorithmic Transaction (SSZ)

**This section is only applicable once [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md) and [EIP-6466](./eip-6466.md) have been included within a hard fork.**

`TransactionPayload` is defined as any type that derives its type from `Profile[TransactionPayload]`.

This EIP introduces a new [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md) transaction profile of SSZ type `AlgorithmicTransaction` defined below:

```python

class AdditionalSignature(ProgressiveContainer(active_fields=[1,1])):
  # The selector for which algorithm is to be used.
  algorithm_type: uint8,
  
  # The signature of the algorithm specified by `algorithm_type`
  signature_info: ProgressiveList[byte],


class SignableData(ProgressiveContainer(active_fields=[1,1,1])):
  # `compute_ssz_sig_hash` of the payload field in the main transaction.
  payload_hash: Hash32,

  # The chain id to which the transaction will be sent
  chain_id: uint256

  # The list of additional transaction-level signatures 
  additional_signatures: List[AdditionalSignature, MAX_ADDITIONAL_INFO]


class AlgorithmicTransaction(ProgressiveContainer(active_fields=[1,1,1,1])):
  # The selector for which algorithm is to be used.
  algorithm_type: uint8,

  # The signature of the algorithm specified by `algorithm_type`
  signature_info: ProgressiveList[byte]

  # The payload of the inner transaction
  payload: TransactionPayload,

  # The chain id to which the transaction will be sent
  chain_id: uint256,

  # The list of additional transaction-level signatures 
  additional_signatures: List[AdditionalSignature, MAX_ADDITIONAL_INFO]

```

The signing hash of the payload MUST be calculated using the `compute_ssz_sig_hash` function below. All `SignableData` fields MUST be set to the equivalent fields in the transaction body.

```python

def compute_ssz_sig_hash(payload: SignableData) -> Hash32:
    return Hash32(ExecutionSigningData(
        object_root=payload.hash_tree_root(),
        domain=DOMAIN_TX_SSZ,
    ).hash_tree_root())

```

If a signature is being overridden via an `additional_signatures` entry, the `Secp256k1ExecutionSignature` MUST be set to `hash_tree_root(AdditionalSignature)` and right-padded with 33 zero bytes. This MUST be verified during transaction validation and each entry MUST NOT be of type `secp256k1`.

Each `additional_signatures` entry MUST be used at least once within the transaction and MUST not be duplicated. Non-used or duplicated entries will invalidate the tx. Entries MUST be sorted in ascending order (0x0 -> 0xff...ff) via `u256(hash_tree_root(AdditionalSignature))`.

#### `identify_transaction_profile` modifications

An additional section is added to the start of the `identify_transaction_profile` helper from [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md):

```python

def identify_transaction_profile(tx: Transaction) -> Type[Profile]:
    if tx.algorithm_type is not None:
        return AlgorithmicTransaction
    
    ...

```

### Algorithm Transaction (Common)

The field `algorithm_type` represents the algorithm used to sign the transaction in the `payload` field.
This EIP does not define algorithms for use with this transaction type apart from `secp256k1`, which may only be used under specific circumstances.

The transaction signature MUST be verified using the `verify` function for the algorithm denoted via `algorithm_type`.

The `additional_signatures` field only needs to be populated if additional protocol-level signatures are required such as [EIP-7702](./eip-7702.md)'s `authorization_list`. 

The Algorithmic Transaction MUST generate a receipt of only the inner transaction, not of the `AlgorithmicTransaction`. Implementations MUST NOT be able to differentiate between an unwrapped and wrapped transaction by receipts alone.

When clients receive an Algorithmic Transaction via gossip or RPC they MUST validate both the Algorithmic Transaction and the inner transaction. If either the transaction or the inner transaction is invalid, the entire transaction is invalid.

Any discrimination of transactions MUST occur only with the inner transaction, e.g. gas prices for block ordering.

### Algorithm specification

Further algorithms MUST be specified via a distinct EIP.

Each type of algorithm MUST specify the following fields:

| Field Name | Description |
|-|-|
|`ALG_TYPE`| The uint8 of the algorithm unique ID |
|`MAX_SIZE`| The maximum size of `signature_info` field in a transaction |
|`GAS_PENALTY`| The additional gas penalty from verification of the signature |

The `GAS_PENALTY` field MUST be assumed to be the worst-case scenario and MUST only account for verification costs, not storage nor signing `GAS_PENALTY`.

A verification function must be present per algorithm. The verification function MUST have the following signature:

`def verify(signature_info: bytes, payload_hash: Hash32) -> Bytes`

The verify function MUST either return an error or return the full public key of the sender.

Specifications MUST include some form of security analysis on the provided algorithm and basic benchmarks justifying gas costs. Additionally, algorithms MUST ensure that variations of signatures cannot be made without the private key. 

An example of this specification can be found [here](../assets/eip-7932/template-eip.md).

### Deriving address from public keys

The function below MUST be used when deriving an address from a public key:

```python

def pubkey_to_address(public_key: Bytes, algorithm_id: uint8) -> ExecutionAddress
    if algorithm_id == 0xFF: # Compatibility shim to ensure backwards compatibility
        return ExecutionAddress(keccak(public_key[1:])[12:])

    # || is binary concatenation
    return ExecutionAddress(keccak(algorithm_id || public_key)[12:])

```

### Algorithm Living EIP

This EIP uses the `Algorithms` object to signify algorithms that have been included within a hard fork.

A living EIP MAY be created on finalization of this EIP to track currently active algorithms across forks. This living EIP MUST contain a formal definition of the `Algorithms` object.

### Verification

Implementations MUST check that transactions pass the following checks:

- The length of the `signature_info` is less than the algorithm's defined `MAX_SIZE`, including `additional_signatures` entries.
- The `algorithm_type` field points to a known algorithm.

If any checks fail, then the transaction containing them is invalid. If called from the precompile, the precompile MUST return `bytes20(0x0)`.
Transactions MUST also follow all rules outlined in the [Transaction specification RLP](#algorithmic-transaction-rlp) or [Transaction specification SSZ](#algorithmic-transaction-ssz) sections.

### Gas calculation

All transactions that use more resources than the secp256k1 curve suffer an additional penalty which MUST be calculated
as specified in the `calculate_penalty` function.

```python

def calculate_penalty(signature_info: bytes, algorithm: int) -> int:
  gas_penalty_base = max(len(signature_info) - SECP256K1_SIGNATURE_SIZE, 0) * GAS_PER_ADDITIONAL_VERIFICATION_BYTE
  total_gas_penalty = gas_penalty_base + ALGORITHMS[algorithm].GAS_PENALTY
  return total_gas_penalty

```

The penalty MUST be added to the `21000` base gas of each transaction before the transaction is processed. A penalty MUST also be added for every instance of an `additional_signatures` object. If the payload's `gas_limit` is less than `21000 + penalty` then the transaction MUST be invalidated.

This transaction also MUST inherit the intrinsics of the wrapped transaction's fee structure (e.g. a wrapped EIP-1559 payload would behave as an EIP-1559 transaction).


### `secp256k1` algorithm

| Field | Value |
|-|-|
|`ALG_TYPE`| `0xFF` |
|`MAX_SIZE`| `SECP256K1_SIGNATURE_SIZE` |
|`GAS_PENALTY`| `0` |

`secp256k1_validate` and `SECP256K1_SIGNATURE_SIZE` are defined in [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md).

```python

def verify(signature_info: bytes, payload_hash: Hash32) -> Bytes
  assert len(signature_info) == SECP256K1_SIGNATURE_SIZE
  secp256k1_validate(signature_info)
  
  # This code is from [EIP-6404](./eip-6404.md)'s `secp256k1_recover_signer` function without
  # the final hashing stage.
  ecdsa = ECDSA()
  recover_sig = ecdsa.ecdsa_recoverable_deserialize(signature_info[0:64], signature_info[64])
  public_key = PublicKey(ecdsa.ecdsa_recover(payload_hash, recover_sig, raw=True))
  uncompressed = public_key.serialize(compressed=False)
  return uncompressed

```

This algorithm MUST ONLY be used if the transaction's signature is secp256k1 but the `additional_signatures` field contains one or more entries. It MUST NOT be present if the transaction does not contain additional signatures. `secp256k1` MUST NOT be present in any `additional_signatures` entry.

### `sigrecover` precompile

This EIP also introduces a new precompile located at `SIGRECOVER_PRECOMPILE_ADDRESS`.

This precompile MUST cost `SIGRECOVER_PRECOMPILE_BASE_GAS` when called regardless of validity. This cost MUST be aggregated with `calculate_penalty(signature_info, algorithm)` and charged before the `sigrecover` precompile executes.

The precompile MUST output the 20-byte address of the signer provided. Callers MUST assume all zero bytes as a failure.

The precompile logic contains the following logic:

```python

def sigrecover_precompile(input: Bytes) -> Bytes:
  # Recover signature, hash and type
  assert(len(input) >= 33)
  hash: Hash32 = input[:32]
  algorithm_type: uint8 = input[32]
  signature: Bytes = input[33:]

  # Ensure the algorithm exists
  if algorithm_type not in Algorithms:
    return ExecutionAddress(0x0)

  alg = Algorithms[algorithm_type]

  # Check sig is smaller than the maximum
  if len(signature) > alg.MAX_SIZE:
    return ExecutionAddress(0x0)

  # Run verify function
  try:
    pubkey = alg.verify(signature, hash)
    return pubkey_to_address(pubkey, algorithm_type)
  except:
    return ExecutionAddress(0x0)
  
```

## Rationale

### Opaque `signature_info` type

As each algorithm has unique properties, e.g. signature recovery and key sizes, the object needs to hold every permutation of every possible signature and additional recovery information. A bytearray of a dynamic size would be able to achieve this goal. However, this leads to a DoS vector which the [Gas penalties](#gas-penalties) section solves.

### Gas penalties

Having multiple different algorithms results in multiple different signature sizes and verification costs. Hence, every signature algorithm that is more expensive than the default ECDSA secp256k1 curve incurs an additional gas penalty. This is to discourage the use of overly expensive algorithms for no specific reason.

The `GAS_PER_ADDITIONAL_VERIFICATION_BYTE` value being `16` was taken from the calldata cost of a transaction, as it is a similar data type and must persist indefinitely to ensure later verification.

### Not specifying account key-sharing / migration

Allowing a single account to share multiple keys creates a security risk as it reduces the security of all addresses to the weakest algorithm. This is also out of scope for this EIP and could be implemented via a future EIP.

### Keeping a similar address rather than introducing a new address format

While adding a new address format for every new algorithm would ensure that collisions never happen and that security would not be bound by the lowest common denominator, it creates an excessively large burden on client and tooling developers.

### New precompile over modifying the `ecrecover` precompile

Initially, modifying the `ecrecover` precompile seemed prudent over creating a new precompile. However, after an initial attempt, it proved too hacky for production use.

### Hard fork over [EIP‑4337](./eip-4337.md) Account Abstraction

This EIP allows for [EIP‑4337](./eip-4337.md) `Bundler`s to settle `UserOperation`s on-chain using a different algorithm. sigrecover also complements Account Abstraction well by reducing on-chain verification costs via `sigrecover`.

## Backwards Compatibility

Non-EIP-7932 transactions will still be processed as the default secp256k1 curve. Therefore, there would be no backwards compatibility issues in processing other transactions.

## Test Cases

<!-- TODO add test cases -->

## Security Considerations

Allowing more ways to potentially sign transactions for a single account may decrease overall security for that specific account. However, this is partially mitigated by the increase in processing power required to trial all algorithms. Even still, adding additional algorithms may need further discussion to ensure that the security of the network would not be compromised.

Having `signature_info` be of no concrete type creates a chance that an algorithm's decoding logic could be specified or implemented incorrectly, which could lead to, in the best case, invalid blocks or, at worst, enabling anyone to sign a fraudulent transaction for any account. This security consideration is delegated to the algorithm's specification, and so care **must** be taken when writing these specifications to avoid critical security flaws.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
