---
eip: eip-n
title: ERC-721 zk-Provable Token Extension
description: An extension to ERC-721 to introduce private stealth addresses
author: Anton Wahrstätter (@Nerolation)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/stealth-addresses-for-erc721s/10330
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-08-11
requires: 165, 721
---

## Abstract
This specification defines an extension to the [ERC-721](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721) standard. The extension adds standardized stealth addresses to the ERC-721 standard to enable users private token ownership.

## Motivation
A standard interface for private ERC-721 tokens that enables users to receive tokens without letting other users know. 

Using Stealth Addresses that are generated from a shared secret between the sender and the receiver, the recipients of transfers are obfuscated. 

## Specification
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Every `ERC-N` compliant contract MUST implement the `ERC-721` (`0x80ac58cd`) and `ERC165` (`0x01ffc9a7`) interfaces:

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0
pragma solidity ^0.8.6;
...
interface ERC-N /* is ERC721, ERC165 */ {

    /// @notice Broadcasts event with a ``Shared Secret`` whenever a privateTransfer occurs.
    /// @dev Emits event with private transfer information `S`. 
    ///  S is generated by the sender an represents the public key to the private key `s`.
    ///  s is a user-generated secret (MUST NOT be the senders account private key).
    ///  The sender broadcasts S for every transfer. Users can use S to check if they were
    ///  the recipients of a respective transfer.
    /// @param publishableData The public key to the sender's secret
    event PrivateTransfer(bytes publishableData)
}
    
```
#### Stealth Address Generation
    


 Sender Key pair    --> $(s,S) \mid S = s * G.$ The value `s` represents a sender-generated secret.
    
 Recipient Key pair --> $(p,P) \mid P = p * G$
 
  For transferring:
 ```console
sharedSecret    = s*P
stealthAddress  = pubtoaddr(P + (G * keccak(sharedSecret)))  // ``to`` value
publishableData = G * s = S                                  // ``publishableData`` value
 ```
    
 For receiving:
 ```console
forall publishableData `S` do:
    if pubtoaddr(P + (G * keccak(S * p))) has token:
        store_key(p + keccak(S * p))
    
```


## Rationale
`EIP-N` emerged from the need of having privacy-preserving ways for interacting with non-fungible tokens (NFTs). NFTs can reveal sensitive private information about the owner. While users might want to prove the ownership of a NFT-concert ticket, they might not want to reveal personal account-related information at the same time. The standardization of stealth address generation for NFTs represents a significant step for privacy. Privacy-preserving solutions require standards to gain adoption, therefore it is critical to focus on generalisable ways of implement ownership-proofs into related contracts.
    
This extension standardizes the method to create and look-up Stealth Addresses. Users can send NFTs without having to interact with the recipient before. Stealth addresses allow only the recipients of token transfers to see that they were the recipients. 
    
Introducing a private `transfer` function requires no changes to the original ERC-721 standard, while optionally offering a standardized way for users to interact with NFTs more privately.

## Backwards Compatibility
EIP--- is fully backwards compatibly with basic `ERC-721` contracts. `EIP---` implements the EIP-165standard.

## Reference Implementation
You can find an implementation of this standard in eip.sol.

## Security Considerations
TBD

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).

