---
eip: 7732
title: Enshrined Proposer-Builder Separation
description: Separates the ethereum block in consensus and execution parts, adds a mechanism for the consensus proposer to choose the execution proposer.
author: Francesco D'Amato <francesco.damato@ethereum.org>, Barnabé Monnot <barnabe.monnot@ethereum.org>, Michael Neuder <michael.neuder@ethereum.org>, Potuz (@potuz), Terence Tsao <ttsao@offchainlabs.com>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7732-enshrined-proposer-builder-separation-epbs/19634
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-06-28
---

## Abstract

This EIP fundamentally changes the way an Ethereum block is validated by decoupling the execution validation from the consensus validation both logically as well as temporally. It does so by introducing a new optional attribution (being a *builder*) and a new duty (submitting *payload timeliness attestations*) to Ethereum validators. The `ExecutionPayload` field of the `BeaconBlockBody` is removed and instead it is replaced by a signed commitment (a `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader` object) from a builder to later reveal the corresponding execution payload. This commitment specifies in particular the blockhash of the execution block and a *value* to be paid to the beacon block proposer. When processing the `BeaconBlock`, the committed value is deducted from the builder's beacon chain balance and credited to the beacon block proposer. A subset of validators in the beacon committee is assigned to the *Payload Timeliness Committee* (PTC), these validators are tasked to attest (by broadcasting a `PayloadAttestationMessage`) to whether the corresponding builder has revealed the committed execution payload (with the right blockhash) in a timely fashion. PTC members are not required to validate the execution payload, execution validation is thus deferred until the next beacon block validation. 

## Motivation

This EIP solves a different set of unrelated important problems. 

- An overwhelming majority of beacon block proposers outsource the construction of the execution payload within their blocks to a third party (henceforth called a *builder*). In order to do so, they request the hash tree root (HTR) of a promised execution payload and submit a `SignedBlindedBeaconBlock` to a trusted party that is tasked with replacing the HTR with the full execution payload (received from the builder) before broadcasting. This EIP allows for a trust-free fair exchange between the beacon block proposer and the builder, guaranteeing that an honest beacon block proposer will receive payment from the builder regardless of the latter's actions and that the honest builder's payload will be the canonical head of the chain regardless of the proposer's action. 
- Currently, validators have the time between receiving the full beacon block (including an execution payload) and the attesting deadline (4 seconds in Ethereum mainnet) to perform both consensus and execution state transition functions, check blob data availability and evaluate the new head of the blockchain. The remainder of the slot time is spent doing less CPU-intense and critical task. By separating the validation of the execution and consensus part of the block, validators are only tasked to perform the consensus state transition function in this critical time before attesting, while execution and data availability validation is deferred for most of the remainder of the slot (between the builder's reveal time and the next attestation deadline). 
- By removing the full execution payload size from the consensus block, it allows for faster network propagation on the critical path. 
- It removes the increased reorg likeliness of including blob transactions in blocks given the natural increase in timelines for DA availability checks and the fact that the builder may broadcast the blob sidecars even before attestations for the beacon block have been released. 
- It prevents validators from missing attestations and strengthens the weight properties of fork choice in the event that builders produce invalid payloads. 
- It removes the need to use trusted middleware in order to delegate block construction to a builder.

## Specification

### Execution Layer

No changes are required. 

### Consensus Layer

The full consensus changes can be found in the consensus-specs Github repository. They are split between: 

- [Beacon Chain](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/8f8ab03acf1656c54f3a81ef18878f853a1cc4c6/specs/_features/eip7732/beacon-chain.md) changes.
- [Fork choice](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/8f8ab03acf1656c54f3a81ef18878f853a1cc4c6/specs/_features/eip7732/fork-choice.md) changes.
- [P2P](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/8f8ab03acf1656c54f3a81ef18878f853a1cc4c6/specs/_features/eip7732/p2p-interface.md) changes.
- [Honest validator guide](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/8f8ab03acf1656c54f3a81ef18878f853a1cc4c6/specs/_features/eip7732/validator.md) changes.
- A new [honest builder](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/8f8ab03acf1656c54f3a81ef18878f853a1cc4c6/specs/_features/eip7732/builder.md) guide. 
- [Fork logic](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/8f8ab03acf1656c54f3a81ef18878f853a1cc4c6/specs/_features/eip7732/fork.md) changes. 

A summary of the main changes is included below, the [Rationale](#rationale) section contains explanation for most of the design decisions around these changes. 

#### Beacon chain changes

##### Constants

| Name | Value | 
| - | - | 
| `PAYLOAD_ABSENT` | `uint8(0)` |
| `PAYLOAD_PRESENT` | `uint8(1)` | 
| `PAYLOAD_WITHHELD` | `uint8(2)` | 
| `PAYLOAD_INVALID_STATUS` | `uint8(3)` |

##### Presets

| Name | Value | 
| - | - | 
| `PTC_SIZE` | `uint64(2**9)` (=512) |
| `DOMAIN_BEACON_BUILDER`     | `DomainType('0x1B000000')` |
| `DOMAIN_PTC_ATTESTER`       | `DomainType('0x0C000000')` |
| `MAX_PAYLOAD_ATTESTATIONS` | `2**2` (= 4) |
 
##### Containers

```python
class PayloadAttestationData(Container):
    beacon_block_root: Root
    slot: Slot
    payload_status: uint8
```

```python
class PayloadAttestation(Container):
    aggregation_bits: Bitvector[PTC_SIZE]
    data: PayloadAttestationData
    signature: BLSSignature
```

```python
class PayloadAttestationMessage(Container):
    validator_index: ValidatorIndex
    data: PayloadAttestationData
    signature: BLSSignature
```

```python
class IndexedPayloadAttestation(Container):
    attesting_indices: List[ValidatorIndex, PTC_SIZE]
    data: PayloadAttestationData
    signature: BLSSignature
```

```python
class SignedExecutionPayloadHeader(Container):
    message: ExecutionPayloadHeader
    signature: BLSSignature
```
    
```python
class ExecutionPayloadEnvelope(Container):
    payload: ExecutionPayload
    builder_index: ValidatorIndex
    beacon_block_root: Root
    blob_kzg_commitments: List[KZGCommitment, MAX_BLOB_COMMITMENTS_PER_BLOCK]
    payload_withheld: boolean
    state_root: Root
```

```python
class SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope(Container):
    message: ExecutionPayloadEnvelope
    signature: BLSSignature
```

The `BeaconState` container is modified with the addition of:

- `latest_block_hash`, of type `Hash32`, to track the blockhash of the last execution payload in the blockchain. 
- `latest_full_slot`, of type `Slot`, to track the latest slot in which an execution payload was included. 
- `latest_withdrawals_root` of type `Root` to track the hash tree root of the latest withdrawals deducted in the beacon chain when processing a `SignedBeaconBlock`. 

The `BeaconBlockBody` is modified with the addition of:

- `signed_execution_payload_header` of type `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader` with the builder's commitment.
- `payload_attestations` of type `List[PayloadAttestation, MAX_PAYLOAD_ATTESTATIONS]` a list of PTC attestations from the previous slot.

The `ExecutionPayloadHeader` object is changed to only track the minimum information needed to commit to a builder's payload.

State transition logic is modified by: 

- A new beacon state getter `get_ptc` returns the PTC members for a given slot. 
- `get_attesting_indices` is modified to not return the beacon committee members that are included in the PTC.
- `process_withdrawals` is modified as follows. Withdrawals are obtained directly from the beacon state instead of the execution payload. They are deducted from the beacon chain. The beacon state `latest_withdrawals_root` is updated with the HTR of this list. The next execution payload MUST include withdrawals matching the `state.latest_withdrawals_root`. 
- `process_execution_payload` is removed from `process_block`. Instead a new function `process_execution_payload_header` is included, this function validates the `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader` included in the `BeaconBlockBody` and transfers the payment from the builder's balance to the proposer. 
- `process_deposit_request` is removed from `process_operations` and deferred until `process_execution_payload`. 
- `process_withdrawal_request` is removed from `process_operations` and deferred until `process_execution_payload`. 
- `process_consolidation_request` is removed from `process_operations` and deferred until `process_execution_payload`. 
- A new `process_payload_attestation` is added to `process_operations`, this function validates the payload timeliness attestations broadcast by the PTC members. 
- `process_execution_payload` is now called as a separate helper when receiving a `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope` on the P2P layer. This function in particular checks that the HTR of the resulting beacon state coincides with the committed one in the payload envelope. 

#### Fork choice changes

##### Constants

| Name                 | Value       |
| -------------------- | ----------- |
| `PAYLOAD_TIMELY_THRESHOLD` | `PTC_SIZE/2` (=`uint64(256)`) | 
| `INTERVALS_PER_SLOT` | `4` |
| `PROPOSER_SCORE_BOOST` | `20` | 
| `PAYLOAD_WITHHOLD_BOOST` | `40` | 
| `PAYLOAD_REVEAL_BOOST` | `40` | 

##### Containers

```python
class ChildNode(Container):
    root: Root
    slot: Slot
    is_payload_present: bool
```

The class `LatestMessage` is modified to track the slot instead of an epoch:

```python
@dataclass(eq=True, frozen=True)
class LatestMessage(object):
    slot: Slot
    root: Root
```

The class `Store` is modified to track the following fields:

```python
    execution_payload_states: Dict[Root, BeaconState] = field(default_factory=dict)
    ptc_vote: Dict[Root, Vector[uint8, PTC_SIZE]] = field(default_factory=dict)
    payload_withhold_boost_root: Root
    payload_withhold_boost_full: bool
    payload_reveal_boost_root: Root
```

- A new handler `on_payload_attestation_message` is called when receiving a `PayloadAttestationMessage` from the P2P network. 
- A new handler `on_execution_payload` is called when receiving a `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope` from the P2P network. 

#### P2P changes

- A new global topic for broadcasting `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader` messages (builder bids).
- A new global topic for broadcasting `PayloadAttestationMessage` objects. 

### Engine API

No changes needed.

## Rationale

### Staked builders

Being a builder is a new attribution of validators. As such builders are staked in the beacon chain. This allows for in-protocol trustless enforcement of the builder's payment to the proposer. Alternatively, payment could be enforced in the Execution Layer (EL) at the cost of adding the corresponding EL consensus-changing logic. Payments in the EL have the advantage of not requiring the builder to periodically submit deposit transactions to replenish their validator balance. Both systems require availability of funds before the payload is revealed: in the Consensus Layer (CL) this is done by getting builders to stake. In the EL this is done with a balance check and a payment transaction. This transaction can be checked without executing the payload only if it the first transaction of the block. 

### Delayed validation

The Payload Timeliness Committee members do not need to validate the execution payload before attesting to it. They perform basic checks such as verifying the builder's signature, and the correct blockhash is included. This takes away the full execution payload validation from the hot path of validation of an Ethereum block, giving the next proposer 6 seconds (`SECONDS_PER_SLOT * 2 // INTERVALS_PER_SLOT`) to validate the payload and every other validator 9 seconds (`SECONDS_PER_SLOT * 3 // INTERVALS_PER_SLOT`). From a user UX perspective, a transaction included in slot `N` by the builder is not widely validated until the proposer of slot `N+1` releases their beacon block on top of block `N` first and the attesters of slot `N+1` vote on this beacon block as the head of the chain.


### (Block, Slot, Payload) - Fork choice

The following features of fork choice are guaranteed under specified margins of security: 

- Proposer unconditional payment.
- Builder reveal safety.
- Builder withhold safety.

Proposer unconditional payment refers to the following. An Ethereum slot can be either:

- *Full*: both the beacon block and the execution payload have been revealed and included on-chain.
- *Skipped*: No beacon block (and therefore no execution payload) has been included on-chain for this slot. 
- *Empty*: The beacon block has been included on-chain, but the committed execution payload has not. 

Proposer unconditional payment refers to the fact that in the third scenario the beacon block proposer received payment from the corresponding builder.

Builder reveal safety refers to the fact that if the builder acted honestly and revealed a payload in a timely fashion (as attested by the PTC) then the revealed payload will be included on-chain. This is enforced by the addition of a new `BUILDER_REVEAL_BOOST` to the LMD weight of the fork choice node that contains the payload. 

Builder withhold safety refers to the fact that if some beacon block containing a builder's commitment is withheld and revealed late, then that beacon block root **will not** be the canonical head of the blockchain in the view of honest validators. 

In order to enforce this, any attestation on a given slot `N` for a block from a previous slot, not only does not support the block of slot `N`, but actually counts against it. This is the content of `(Block, Slot)` voting. Similarly, if a consensus for slot `N+1` has the consensus block for slot `N` as parent beacon block, but the execution payload revealed in `N-1` as parent execution block (thus ignoring the execution payload that may have been revealed during slot `N`), then any attestation for this consensus block `N+1` **does not** support a chain that descends from the execution payload committed in consensus block `N`, that is, from the *full slot* `N`. This is the content of `(Block, Slot, Payload)` voting. 

### Builder timeliness boosts

When a builder reveals an expected payload and the PTC achieved consensus that it was timely, that is, when at least `PAYLOAD_TIMELY_THRESHOLD` votes have been received for `PAYLOAD_PRESENT`, the forkchoice node containing the full slot (that is the consensus block together with its payload present) receives a boost equivalent to 40% of the beacon committee. 

Similarly, when a builder reveals a *payload withheld* message and the PTC achieved consensus by having at least `PAYLOAD_TIMELY_THRESHOLD` votes for `PAYLOAD_WITHHELD`, then the parent consensus block receives a boost equivalent to 40% of the beacon committee. Given the `(Block, Slot)` nature of fork choice voting, this boost counts **against** the consensus block containing the builder's commitment. 

Both these boosts are present to guarantee the Builder's reveal and withhold safety under the parameters described in the [Security Considerations](#security-considerations) section. 

### PTC equivocations

There is no penalty for PTC nor payload equivocation (that is revealing the right payload and also a withheld message at the same time). A collusion of a builder controlling network partition with a single malicious PTC member could cause a split view by achieving consensus both on payload withheld and a payload present. This could be mitigated by setting `PAYLOAD_TIMELY_THRESHOLD` to be 2/3 of the PTC, in which case the malicious operator would have to control at least 33% of the PTC. 

Another mitigation mechanism is to add new slashing conditions for payload equivocation or PTC equivocations (both are signed messages by validators). 

Since this attack results in a split view at a cost for the builder (the payload is revealed and may not be included) this EIP opted for simplicity of implementation.


### Withdrawals

Withdrawals from the beacon chain are complex in nature, they involve removing funds from one layer and crediting them on another, with different trigger mechanisms that can start from either layer. Before applying the consensus layer state transition function to a given beacon state `pre_state` and processing a given signed beacon block `block`, the set of withdrawals that are expected to be deducted from the beacon chain are completely determined by `pre_state`. Previous to this EIP the set of withdrawals that are credited on the execution layer are included in `block`. The block is deemed invalid if these withdrawals do not match. With the separation included in this EIP, these operations of deducting and crediting become asynchronous:

- When processing the beacon block, the withdrawals are deducted from the beacon chain. 
- The set of withdrawals just deducted is committed to the beacon state `post_state`.  
- When processing any execution payload whose parent beacon state is `post_state`, the payload is deemed invalid if it doesn't include precisely the list of withdrawals committed to `post_state`. 

This asynchronous mechanism has some consequences as slots may be *empty* as defined above. In these cases, the consensus layer does not process any more withdrawals until an execution payload has fulfilled the outstanding ones. An alternative design would be to defer all of withdrawal processing to the execution payload validation phase (ie. `process_execution_payload`). This has the advantage of not needing to track the fulfilled withdrawals on the beacon chain. The logic changes when several payloads are missing, in which case balances on the beacon chain change and therefore a withdrawal that would be possible with the former mechanism may be different, or even impossible with the latter.

### Three state transition functions

The current EIP adds an extra state transition function to the block processing in Ethereum. Processing a `SignedBeaconBlock` changes the consensus layer `BeaconState`. A `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope` changes both the execution layer state and the consensus layer one. As such, the envelope commits to the consensus layer post-state-transition beacon state root. 

### Compatible designs 

#### Inclusion lists

This EIP is fully compatible with forward inclusion lists as specified in [EIP-7547](./eip-7547.md) or similar.

#### Slot auctions

A simple change to this EIP is to remove the blockhash commitment from the `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader`. This allows the builder to commit any payload to the slot. A preliminary security analysis shows that payload equivocation does not weaken fork choice's FFG. Some advantages of Slot auctions include:

- Better user experience as any submitted transaction can be included in the next block (with block auctions a transaction sent in the first half of the slot can only be included in the following block). 
- Longer continuous time to build blocks. 
- Better compatibility designs with fork choice enforced inclusion list proposals. 


## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP introduces backward incompatible changes to the block validation rule set on the consensus layer and must be accompanied by a hard fork. 

## Security Considerations

### Reorg resistance 

`PROPOSER_SCORE_BOOST` is reduced from 40 to 20. This does not allow however a ex-ante reorg by a proposer with 20% of the total stake as the attacker's payload will also not be included. Proposers are protected against *1-slot sandwich* reorgs by a colluding set of validators and builders controlling more than 20% of the total stake.

### Builder safety

- A colluding set of proposers and attesters controlling consecutive blocks and more than 20% of the total stake can reorg a builder's payload and force it to pay the bid's value. 
- There is no possible *unbundling* of the builder's payload in the same slot, that is, if the builder reveals a payload for the head of the chain, no other payload is possible for the current slot. 

### Malicious PTC

The expected time for a malicious attacker, controlling 35% of the total stake, to have a majority control on the PTC is 205 000 years. 

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
