---
eip: 3551
title: Location Metadata Standard in ERC-721 Tokens
description: Improve cross-platform metadata interoperability for ERC-721 tokens using a location property
author: Ricardo Chacon (@RicardoChacon), Isabella Costanza (@isabellacostanza), Gabriela Garro (@gabygarro), James Jose (@jamesjosegdsey), David Mendes (@de-mendes)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/request-for-feedback-standardizing-location-metadata-and-other-metadata-in-erc-721-tokens/5985
status: Draft
type: Informational
created: 2021-05-04
requires: 721
---
​
## Abstract
​
This EIP specifies how location metadata should be represented in an ERC-721 token. It serves as an extension of the ERC-721 Metadata Standard as it adds a "location" field to the JSON schema. This location metadata proposal is compliant with the [Place Schema](https://schema.org/Place) and [GeoCoordinates Schema](https://schema.org/GeoCoordinates) from Schema.org (v12.0) and therefore extensible for GS1 Web Vocabulary.
​
## Motivation
​
This standard will promote composability and interoperability of tokens across platforms and systems. Use cases which rely on location metadata or that would benefit from implementing it often find themselves in the position of structuring this data in whichever way serves their specific purpose. Therefore, we have leveraged existing widely accepted standards from [Schema.Org](https://schema.org).

Moreover, inconsistent data formats present a rather challenging situation if an user wants to make use of this data, as it can be computationally expensive and slow to clean it up. This standard provides a solution by setting a standard which will cover the need of having location metadata and also give the community a framework which will prove tremendously useful at the application layer.
​
One example where consistent location data structures are crucial is in supply chain management. As business partners try to coordinate their inventory to eliminate the potential for stockouts or spoilage, they need to understand the location of tokenized inputs. Tracking these inputs on one interface is only possible if all tokens are using the same standards for recording location. 
​
## Specification
​
This EIP extends the implemenation of the Asset Metadata JSON in the ERC-721 tokens; as such, the only technical requirement is to write the JSON file as follows:
​
```json
{
  "title": "Asset Metadata",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "name": {
        "type": "string",
        "description": "Identifies the asset to which this NFT represents"
      },
    "description": {
        "type": "string",
        "description": "Describes the asset to which this NFT represents"
      },
    "image": {
        "type": "string",
        "description": "A URI pointing to a resource with mime type image/* representing the asset to which this NFT represents. Consider making any images at a width between 320 and 1080 pixels and aspect ratio between 1.91:1 and 4:5 inclusive."
      },
    "location": {
      "@context": "https://schema.org",
      "@type": "Place",
      "name": "Identifies the asset to which this NFT represents",
      "geo": {
        "@type": "GeoCoordinates",
        "latitude": "Estimates the latitude of the asset to which this NFT represents (WGS 84).",
        "longitude": "Estimates the longitude of the asset to which this NFT represents (WGS 84).",
        "elevation": "The elevation of a location (WGS 84)."
      },
      "address": {
        "@type": "PostalAddress",
        "addressCountry": "The country. For example, USA. You can also provide the two-letter ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code.",
        "addressRegion": "The region in which the locality is, and which is in the country. For example, California or another appropriate first-level Administrative division",
        "addressLocality": "The locality in which the street address is, and which is in the region. For example, Mountain View.",
        "streetAddress": "The street address. For example, 1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy.",
        "postalCode": "The postal code. For example, 94043."
      }
    }
  }
}
```
​
### <ins>Fields Contemplated</ins>
​
The following table are some of the fields needed and commonly used to keep up with location throughout supply chain pipelines. The Schema Type and Property refer to their respective definitions found in Schema.org and the following properties are not an exhaustive list since any Schema.org schema and/or property relevant to location can be implemented by adding the proper type as previously shown.
​
Schema Type|Property
:-:|:-:
Place|name
Place|geo
GeoCoordinates|latitude
GeoCoordinates|longitude
GeoCoordinates|elevation
Place|address  
PostalAddress|addressCountry  
PostalAddress|addressRegion  
PostalAddress|addressLocality  
PostalAddress|streetAddress  
PostalAddress|postalCode  
​
## Rationale
​
We need metadata master data standards so that tokenized assets can be fully interoperable, composable and managed in relation to one another, no matter where those tokens were minted and who updates the metadata. Defining standards supports the goal of decentralization by making it easier for unrelated token minters to communicate using a common standard. Location is a particularly important to standardize as it can expedite the benefits realized of adopting blockchain solutions for trustless transactions.
​
Supply chain participants with higher levels of upstream and downstream visibility more accurately forecast demand and supply and make supplier and manufacturing decisions accordingly. The existing siloes in supply chain is currently a barrier to more optimized supply chain management. ERC721 tokenized physical asset holders currently face the following problems:
  - Track the physical movement of multiple, related assets across different asset owners to manage risk of asset stockouts
  - Understand inventory of a asset type across multiple locations to inform transportation and logistics decisions
  - Track missing shipments from trading partners
  - Verify asset origin
  - Identify, track, and recall assets across multiple locations
  - Track asset movement for compliance and trade regulation purposes
  - Analyze multiple, related assets created and updated by different parties
  - Instill confidence in data governance
 
Current solutions are siloed and not coordinated across the community. This need for standards is being addressed by organizations and protocols in a siloed way. For example, OriginTrail, Microsoft, and IBM are promoting GS1 standards with their enterprise users. In fact, the OriginTrail protocol verifies that data meets GS1 standards and is therefore interoperable. Data that is accepted by the protocol and stored in the decentralized graph database must adhere to standards.
​
In addition, Silicon Valley’s Innovation Program is promoting certain W3 standards with US government agencies, and the Blockchain in Transport Alliance (BiTA) is creating standards for transportation. Companies and individuals are committing to different standards and thereby limiting interoperability across these groups. While these standards are not necessarily conflicting, a hierarchy must be defined for leveraging standards based on use case. There is a need for a universally recognized standards for the ERC721 metadata extension. This is the key to interoperability and composability.
​
There has been success in the past of enterprises contributing to standards. A prominent example is XBRL, an open international standard for digital business reporting that allows reporting information to move between organizations rapidly, accurately and digitally. It was defined when the American Institute for Public Certified Accountants (AIPCA) were unable to systematically consolidate and assess financial statements and audit schedules. This led them to explore XML based solutions. Then a steering committee was formed, with 12 companies (including the Big Four audit firms) and AIPCA. This has since been broadly adopted by regulators, companies, governments, data providers, analysts, investors, and accountants.
​
## Different Design
​
A different design that was considered was in the form:
​​
<center>Field</center>|<center>Expected Characterisitics</center>| <center>Examples</center>|<center>Name in JSON schema</center>
-|-|-|-|
Location Name|• String<br>• UTF-8|“Warehouse A”,<br>“Factory 02”,<br>“Factory #2”,<br>“DV’s Restaurant”,<br>“A&B”,<br>“Günter’s”<br>|name
Address|•   String<br>•   UTF-8|“5 Times Square”,<br>“243 E. Main St.”,<br>“101 1/2 Main St”|postal_address
City/Locality|• String<br>• UTF-8|“Paris”, “Cape Town”|city
State/Province|•    String<br>• UTF-8|“Washington”, “Province No 1”, “Beijing”|state
Postal Code|•   String<br>• Latin Alphabet [A-Z], numbers [0-9] and dashes<br>•    Or UTF-8 depending on the region|“10069”<br>“10069-1234”, “D10”|postal_code
Country|•   String<br>• UTF-8|“USA”, “Spain”, “Panama”|country
Latitude|•  String<br>• Decimal Degrees<br>•    From -90 to +90<br>•    Decmials for precision|“-29.23123”,”+80.3122”|latitude
Longitude|• String<br>• Decimal Degrees<br>•    From -180 to +180<br>•  Decimals for precision|"-66.165321","+130.399994"|longitude
Altitude|•  Number<br>• In meters<br>•  Sea level as a reference|"2000","8849"|altitude
Coordinate Reference System Identifier|•    URL<br>• Registry:ID<br>•   Only ID is there's formal definition in the data source<br>•   It's recommended to use a registry authority|“EPSG:4626” “WGS86”|crsid
---

### <ins>Fields Required</ins>
​
<center>Field</center>|<center>Required</center>
-|-
Location Name|<center>Optional<center/>
Address|<center>Optional<center/>
City/Locality|<center>Optional, needs the Country and State to work properly<center/>
State/Province|<center>Optional, needs the Country to work properly<center/>
Postal Code|<center>Optional<center/>
Country|<center>Optional<center/>
Latitude|<center>Optional<center/>
Longitude|<center>Optional<center/>
Altitude|<center>Optional<center/>
CRSID|<center>Optional, default is assumed to be WGS84<center/>
​

With these considerations in mind:
​
1.	Geolocation attributes are based on the standard [ISO 6709](https://www.iso.org/standard/39242.html), for further information, please refer to the standard document.
2.	UTF-8 as encoding is used to provide flexibility to the values when written in different languages, also the RFC definition for JSON format specifies:<br>
    * JSON text exchanged between systems that are not part of a closed ecosystem MUST be encoded using UTF-8<br>
    * [RFC 8259](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8259) - The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data Interchange Format.
3.	EPSG is one of the biggest registries for CRS definitions, that’s why the recommendation of use that one, however, as there are several formats allowed by the ISO 6709, depends strictly on the application on how to treat it.
4.	ISO 6709 about decimal degrees: “For computer data interchange of latitude and longitude, this International Standard generally suggests that decimal degrees be used”.

Thanks to community feedback and outreach we took to the advice of using an approach leveraging Schema.org standards instead, in order to drive adoption forward as these standards are widely accepted.
​
## Backwards Compatibility
​
This EIP is fully backwards compatible. This is because any ERC-721 token that implements the Asset Metadata JSON does it optionally. This means that ERC-721 Tokens which do not have an Asset Metadata JSON will not be impacted. Similarly, any token which does implement it will continue to live regardless of the implementation of this EIP. Nonetheless, any non-compliant token can be made compliant with a simple metadata update with the location field and its corresponding attributes, as detailed in the [Technical Specification Section](#Specification). 
​
This being said, there is one case where some confusion could arise. It would be when a token's metadata already has a "location" field which does not comply to this EIP. However, this particular case pertains more to the application level and how the NFT's metadata is being used. To conclude, this case does not generate backwards incompatibilities since no minted ERC-721 will be impacted but if a solution (as described earlier) were already to exist, a decision will need to be made as to which standard to follow.
​
## Reference Implementation
​
```json
{ 
  "name": "My Token",
  "description": "Just a token",
  "image": "https://images.blokchain.ey.com/0b1abca",
  "location": {
    "@context": "https://schema.org",
    "@type": "Place",
    "name": "My store",
    "geo": {
        "@type": "GeoCoordinates",
        "latitude": "+50.213",
        "longitude": "-30.1322",
        "elevation": "2000"
    },
    "address": {
        "@type": "PostalAddress",
        "addressCountry": "USA",
        "addressRegion": "NY",
        "addressLocality": "New York",
        "postalCode": "1312",
        "streetAddress": "5 Time Square"
    }
  }
}
```
​
## Security Considerations
​
The biggest security implication of proposing this EIP is that it does not address privacy protection mechanisms for the transacting of metadata. This means that privacy is not guaranteed against potential Dicitonary Attacks or leaks in the event of a hack to any specific system following this EIP's guidance. However, we have looked into solutions such as 0xcert and Nightfall / 0xcert's Nightfall fork as potential mechanisms to ensure the compliance of this EIP. We conjecture that Zero Knowledge Proof (Zkp) protocols will be commonplace where privacy of the data itself is required and since this is ultimately not addressed with a direct change to the metadata, it does not pertain to what this EIP offers. Finally, those solutions would drastically change the way any given system works and therefore are beyond the scope of this EIP.
​
## Use Cases
​
EY’s Explorer and Visualizer tool and tokenization service leverage standards for location metadata so that subscribers can create a token using standards defined in the OpsChain tokenization service and visualize the movement of that token to prove origin to end consumers and business partners with a different product entirely.
​

## Disclaimer 
​
This EIP does not promote third party products or services. Because of EY’s role as a public accounting firm, we are required to remain independent in our work from audit clients. This includes avoiding the perception that EY is promoting technology or solutions from any one firm or giving preferential access or information to any one firm. As a result, and in the interest of maximum public transparency, we will only be accepting feedback received through the public forum. Any private messages will be returned with a request that they be published to the full public forum instead. Any private revisions will be replied with the same message.
​
## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
