---
eip: 1702
title: Generalized Account Versioning Scheme
author: Wei Tang (@sorpaas)
discussions-to: https://github.com/sorpaas/EIPs/issues/2
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2017-12-30
---

## Simple Summary

Introduce account versioning for smart contracts so upgrading the VM
or introducing new VMs can be easier.

## Abstract

This defines a method of hard forking while maintaining the exact
functionality of existing account by allowing multiple versions of the
virtual machines to execute in the same block. This is also useful to
define future account state structures when we introduce the on-chain
WebAssembly virtual machine.

## Motivation

By allowing account versioning, we can execute different virtual
machine for contracts created at different times. This allows breaking
features to be implemented while making sure existing contracts work
as expected.

Note that this specification might not apply to all hard forks. We
have emergency hard forks in the past due to network attacks. Whether
they should maintain existing account compatibility should be
evaluated in individual basis. If the attack can only be executed once
against some particular contracts, then the scheme defined here might
still be applicable. Otherwise, having a plain emergency hard fork
might still be a good idea.

## Specification

### Account State

Re-define account state stored in the world state trie to have 5
items: `nonce`, `balance`, `storageRoot`, `codeHash`, and
`version`. The newly added field `version` is a 256-bit integer. When
`version` is zero, the account is RLP-encoded with the first 4
items. When `version` is not zero, the account is RLP-encoded with 5
items.

### Contract Execution

When fetching an account code from state, we always fetch the
associated version field together. We refer to this as the *code's
version* below. The code of the account is always executed in the
*code's version*.

In particular, this means that for `DELEGATECALL` and `CALLCODE`, the
version of the execution call frame is the same as
delegating/receiving contract's version.

### Contract Deployment

In Ethereum, a contract has a deployment method, either by a contract
creation transaction, or by another contract. If we regard this
deployment method a contract's *parent*, then we find them forming a
family of contracts, with the *root* being a contract creation
transaction.

We let a family of contracts to always have the same `version`. That
is, `CREATE` and `CREATE2` will always deploy contract that has the
same `version` as the *code's version*.

### Validation

A new phrase, *validation* is added to contract deployment (by
`CREATE` / `CREATE2` opcodes, or by contract creation
transaction). When `version` is `0`, the phrase does nothing and
always succeeds. Future VM versions can define additional validation
that has to be passed.

If the validation phrase fails, deployment does not proceed and return
out-of-gas.

### Contract Creation Transaction

Define `LATEST_VERSION` in a hard fork to be the latest supported VM
version. A contract creation transaction is always executed in
`LATEST_VERSION` (which means the *code's version* is
`LATEST_VERSION`), and deploys contracts of `LATEST_VERSION`. Before a
contract creation transaction is executed, run *validation* on the
contract creation code. If it does not pass, return out-of-gas.

### Precompiled Contract and Externally-owned Address

Precompiled contracts and externally-owned addresses do not have
`version`. If a message-call transaction or `CALL` / `CALLCODE` /
`STATICCALL` / `DELEGATECALL` touches a new externally-owned address
or a non-existing precompiled contract address, it is always created
with `version` field being `0`.

## Alternative Specification

The above "Specification" section is commonly known as EIP-1702
variant I, below we define an alternative design, commonly known as
EIP-1702 variant II.

Applies all sections in "Specification" except "Contract Deployment",
and change it as below.

### Contract Deployment

This provides an alternative design that allows `CREATE`, `CREATE2`
and contract creation transaction to deploy contract whose version are
different.

The client maintains a mapping `V` of currently supported version
prefix (for example, `\0asm`) to `version` number. All version
prefixes have the invariant that given any prefix in mapping `a` and
`b`, `a` is not `b`'s prefix. Version numbers in `V` cannot be zero.

For contract deployment transaction, run the following additional
steps.

* Check that the code starts with an prefix in `V`, with `version`
  number.
* Use `version`'s validation procedure to validate the *whole* code
  (with prefix).
* Execute the code with the *code's version* being `version`.
* Apply the deployment routine defined as below.

Apply the following cause on contract deployment for all `CREATE`,
`CREATE2` and contract deployment transaction's deployment phrase.

* If the *code's version* is zero, then `CREATE` and `CREATE2` will
  always deploy contract with version zero.
* If the *code's version* is not zero, do the following checks and
  operations, and return out-of-gas if any of it fails:
  * Check that the code starts with an prefix in `V`, with `version`
    number.
  * Use `version`'s validation procedure to validate the *whole* code
    (with prefix).
  * Deploy the contract with `version`.
  
## Extensions

In relation to the above "Specification" section (EIP-1702 variant I),
we have defined the base account versioning layer. The base account
versioning layer is already useful by itself and can handle most EVM
improvements. Below we define two specifications that can be deployed
separately, which improves functionality of variant I.

### Extending Contract Creation Transaction

The base account versioning layer only allows contract of the
newest version to be deployed via contract creation transaction. This
is a reasonable assumption for current Ethereum network, because most
of new features added to EVM are additions, and developers almost
never want to deploy contracts that are not of the newest version. In
this section, we provide an extension to allow multiple versions of
contracts to be deployed via contract creation transaction.

Add an additional field `version` (256-bit integer) in contract
creation transaction. So it becomes `nonce`, `gasprice`, `startgas`,
`to`, `value`, `data`, `v`, `r`, `s`, `version`. When signing or
recovering, sign ten items, with `v`, `r`, `s` as defined by EIP-155.

The transaction would be executed with the *code's version* in
`version` supplied, and deploys contract of `version`. If `version` is
not supported or *validation* does not pass, return out-of-gas.

### Extending `CREATE` and `CREATE2`

The base account versioning layer only allows contracts of the same
version to be deployed through `CREATE` and `CREATE2`. In this
section, we provide an extension to allow different versions of
contracts to be deployed via them, by providing two new opcodes,
`VCREATE` and `VCREATE2`.

Define two new opcodes `VCREATE` and `VCREATE2` at `0xf6` and `0xf7`
respectively. `VCREATE` takes 4 stack arguments (version, value, input
offset, input size), and `VCREATE2` takes 5 stack arguments (version,
endowment, memory_start, memory_length, salt). Note that except the
stack item `version`, other arguments are the same as `CREATE` and
`CREATE2`.

The two new opcodes behave identically to `CREATE` and `CREATE2`,
except that it deploys contracts with version specified by stack item
`version`.

The network at all times maintains a constant list within the client
of all deployable versions (which can be different from supported
versions). Upon `VCREATE` and `VCREATE2`, if the specified `version`
is not on the list of deployable versions, return out-of-gas.

## Usage Template

This section defines how other EIPs might use this account versioning
EIP. Note that currently we only define the usage template for base
layer.

Account versioning is usually applied directly to a hard fork meta
EIP. EIPs in the hard fork are grouped by the virtual machine type,
for example, EVM and eWASM. For each of them, we define:

* **Version**: a non-zero integer less than `2^256` that uniquely
  identifies this version. Note that it does not need to be
  sequential.
* **Parent version**: the base that all new features derived
  from. With parent version of `0` we define the base to be legacy
  VM. Note that once a version other than `0` is defined, the legacy
  VM's feature set must be frozen. When defining an entirely new VM
  (such as eWASM), parent version does not apply.
* **Features**: all additional features that are enabled upon this
  version.

## Rationale

This introduces account versioning via a new RLP item in account
state. The first design above gets account versioning by making the
contract *family* always have the same version. In this way, versions
are only needed to be provided by contract creation transaction, and
there is no restrictions on formats of code for any version. If we
want to support multiple newest VMs (for example, EVM and WebAssembly
running together), then this requires alternative design in contract
creation transaction section

The second design above requires new versions of VMs follow a
formatting -- that it always has a prefix. In this way, the version
can be derived from the prefix, thus allowing a contract *family* to
have multiple versions. It also makes it so that we can pin contract
creation transaction using only one VM version, and it can deploy
other VM versions.

Alternatively, account versioning can also be done through:

* **EIP-1707** and **EIP-1712**: This makes an account's versioning
  soly dependent on its code header prefix. If with only EIP-1707, it
  is not possible to certify any code is valid, because current VM
  allows treating code as data. This can be fixed by EIP-1712, but the
  drawback is that it's potentially backward incompatible.
* **EIP-1891**: Instead of writing version field into account RLP
  state, we write it in a separate contract. This can accomplish the
  same thing as this EIP and potentially reduces code complexity, but
  the drawback is that every code execution will require an additional
  trie traversal, which impacts performance.

## Backwards Compatibility

Account versioning is fully backwards compatible, and it does not
change how current contracts are executed.

## Discussions

### Performance

Currently nearly all full node implementations uses config parameters
to decide which virtual machine version to use. Switching virtual
machine version is simply an operation that changes a pointer using a
different set of config parameters. As a result, this scheme has
nearly zero impact to performance.

### WebAssembly

This scheme can also be helpful when we deploy on-chain WebAssembly
virtual machine. In that case, WASM contracts and EVM contracts can
co-exist and the execution boundary and interaction model are clearly
defined as above.

## Test Cases and Implementations

To be added.
