---
eip: <to be assigned>
title: Fork Name Standards
author: DimitryKh <dimitry@ethereum.org>
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/retesteth/issues/23
status: Draft
category: Informational
created: 2019-03-18
---

## Simple Summary
Name forks like  `ETH-001-00, ETH-002-00, ETH-003-00` and so on.

## Abstract
Each client parses `ETH-001-00` kind of indexes into ethereum fork rules, the major number increasing for roadmap forks and the minor for other forks. `ETH-001-00` stands for Frontier rules.
Therefore if in any config file instead of `Frontier`, an `ETH-001-00` name provided. The client must parse it as a `Frontier` rule.
Parsing previous naming convention (`Frontier, Homestead, EIP150`) becomes optional. `ETH-xxx-yy` naming convention is mandatory for all clients to implement. 

## Motivation
**Clients:**  
Different clients use different fork names even for the main network on their genesis config. If we want a generic genesis format, we have to use a standard for the fork names. 

**Development:**  
After `ConstantinopleFix` release, devs wanted to rename it into `Petersburg`. That require code changes which is development time and money.
And code changes to the client might result in errors and bugs if not tested and reviewed properly.
During hardfork development the name is not fixed, thus closer to the release date, need to change the fork name again in the code and in the test files.
The contents of a fork may also change as Testnet deployments demonstrate issues.  There may also be emergency forks between planned major forks
Following standard for the fork names will allow to hardcode fork names without issues.

## Specification
In genesis config the following fields must be understood by all clients:

```
"ETH-001-00-FB": "5000",
"ETH-002-00-FB": "15000",
...
"ETH-xxx-yy-FB": "25000"
```

Where `ETH-001-00-FB` stands for `Frontier` fork block number. 

The counting pattern will follow an `ETH-xxx-yy` 'planned'/'unplanned' pattern, where the first `xxx` number increments for each planned fork, and each unplanned fork after the planned fork increments the `yy` number.  Unplanned forks may be for emergency forks, such as Spurious Dragon, or for late revisions to fork definitions that was deployed onto long lived testnets, such as ConstantinopleFix/Petersburg.

## Rationale
Rationale is to get a fork name standard for generic genesis format so that RPC test tools provide clients with a uniform genesis configuration.
It is easy to add +1 to the next fork name number rather then discuss `ConstantinopleFix` vs `Petersburg` and change the constant string everywhere: both in code and tests when we want to rename.

## Backwards Compatibility
Clients could support `Frontier, Homestead` and any other naming convention. 

## Test Cases
Retesteth will generate `genesis.json` and run all tests with this specification.

## Implementation
**Aleth:**  
Aleth replace hardcoded variable names with an array that resolve 
```
chainParams().forkblocks["ETH-002-00-FB"]
```
into `DAO fork` block number, rather then using: 

```
u256 const& daoHardfork = chainParams().daoHardforkBlock;
```

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
