---
eip: 7600
title: Hardfork Meta - Pectra
description: EIPs included in the Prague/Electra Ethereum network upgrade.
author: Tim Beiko (@timbeiko)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7600-hardfork-meta-prague-electra/18205
status: Review
type: Meta
created: 2024-01-18
requires: 2537, 2935, 6110, 7002, 7251, 7549, 7594, 7685, 7692, 7702
---

## Abstract

This Meta EIP lists the EIPs formally considered for and included in the Prague/Electra network upgrade.

## Specification

### EIPs Scheduled for Inclusion  

* [EIP-2537](./eip-2537.md): Precompile for BLS12-381 curve operations
* [EIP-2935](./eip-2935.md): Save historical block hashes in state
* [EIP-6110](./eip-6110.md): Supply validator deposits on chain
* [EIP-7002](./eip-7002.md): Execution layer triggerable exits
* [EIP-7251](./eip-7251.md): Increase the MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE  
* [EIP-7549](./eip-7549.md): Move committee index outside Attestation
* [EIP-7594](./eip-7594.md): PeerDAS - Peer Data Availability Sampling
* [EIP-7685](./eip-7685.md): General purpose execution layer requests 
* [EIP-7702](./eip-7702.md): Set EOA account code for one transaction
* EOF EIPs listed as part of [EIP-7692](./eip-7692.md), namely: 
    * [EIP-663](./eip-663.md): SWAPN, DUPN and EXCHANGE instructions
    * [EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md): EOF - EVM Object Format v1
    * [EIP-3670](./eip-3670.md): EOF - Code Validation
    * [EIP-4200](./eip-4200.md): EOF - Static relative jumps
    * [EIP-4750](./eip-4750.md): EOF - Functions
    * [EIP-5450](./eip-5450.md): EOF - Stack Validation
    * [EIP-6206](./eip-6206.md): EOF - JUMPF and non-returning functions
    * [EIP-7069](./eip-7069.md): Revamped CALL instructions
    * [EIP-7480](./eip-7480.md): EOF - Data section access instructions
    * [EIP-7620](./eip-7620.md): EOF Contract Creation
    * [EIP-7698](./eip-7698.md): EOF - Creation transaction

### EIPs Considered for Inclusion

* RIP-7212: Precompile for secp256r1 Curve Support
* [EIP-7547](./eip-7547.md): Inclusion lists
* [EIP-7623](./eip-7623.md): Increase calldata cost
* [EIP-7742](./eip-7742.md): Uncouple blob count between CL and EL 

### EIPs Proposed for Inclusion

For clarity, and due to the late addition of this section in the Pectra network upgrade planning process, only EIPs which have recently been proposed or discussed are listed here. For the full list of Pectra proposals, please refer to the `discussion-to` link for this EIP. If the author has missed relevant EIPs in this section, please propose additions by opening a pull request.  

* [EIP-6493](./eip-6493.md): SSZ Transaction Signature Scheme
* [EIP-7495](./eip-7495.md): SSZ StableContainer
* [EIP-7688](./eip-7688.md): Forward compatible consensus data structures
* [EIP-7761](./eip-7761.md): IS_CONTRACT instruction

### Full Specifications 

Only EIPs Scheduled for Inclusion are mentioned in this section. 

#### Consensus Layer

EIP-6110, EIP-7002 EIP-7251, EIP-7549 and EIP-7594 require changes to Ethereum's consensus layer. While the EIPs present an overview of these changes, the full specifications can be found in the `specs/electra` and `specs/_features` directories of the `ethereum/consensus-specs` repository.

#### Execution Layer

All EOF EIPs, listed in EIP-7692, as well as EIP-2537, EIP-2935, EIP-6110, EIP-7002, EIP-7685, and EIP-7702 require changes to Ethereum's execution layer. The EIPs fully specify those changes. 

### Activation 

| Network Name     | Activation Epoch | Activation Timestamp |
|------------------|------------------|----------------------|
| Sepolia          |                  |                      |
| Holešky          |                  |                      |
| Mainnet          |                  |                      |

**Note**: rows in the table above will be filled as activation times are decided by client teams. 

## Rationale

This Meta EIP provides a global view of all changes included in the Prague/Electra network upgrade, as well as links to full specification. 

## Security Considerations

None.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
