---
eip: 1829
title: Precompile for Elliptic Curve Linear Combinations
author: Remco Bloemen <Recmo@0x.org>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/ewasm-precompile-for-general-elliptic-curve-math/2581
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2019-03-06
---

# Precompile for Elliptic Curve Linear Combinations

## Simple Summary

Currently the EVM only supports *secp256k1* in a limited way through `ecrecover` and *altbn128* through two pre-compiles. There are draft proposals to add more curves. There are many more elliptic curve that have useful application for integration with existing systems or newly developed curves for zero-knowledge proofs.

This EIP adds a precompile that allows whole classes of curves to be used.

## Abstract

A precompile that takes a curve and computes a linear combination of curve points.

## Motivation

## Specification

Given integers `m, α` and `β`, scalars `s_i`, and curve points `A_i` construct the elliptic curve

```
y² = x³ + α ⋅ x + β  mod  m
```

and compute the following

```
C = s₀ ⋅ A₀ + s₁ ⋅ A₁ + ⋯ + s_n ⋅ A_n
```

aka *linear combination*, *inner product*, *multi-multiplication* or even *multi-exponentiation*.

```
(Cx, Cy) := ecmul(m, α, β,  s0, Ax0, As0, s1, Ax1, As1, ...)
```

### Gas cost

```
BASE_GAS = ...
ADD_GAS  = ...
MUL_GAS  = ...
```

The total gas cost is `BASE_GAS` plus `ADD_GAS` for each `s_i` that is `1` and `MUL_GAS` for each `s_i > 1` (`s_i = 0` is free).

### Encoding of points

Encode as `(x, y')` where `s` indicates whether `y` or `-y` is to be taken. It follows SEC 1 v 1.9 2.3.4, except uncompressed points (`y' = 0x04`) are not supported.

|  `y'`  | `(x, y)` |
|--------|-----|
| `0x00` | Point at infinity |
| `0x02` | Solution with `y` even |
| `0x03` | Solution with `y` odd |

Conversion from affine coordinates to compressed coordinates is trivial: `y' = 0x02 | (y & 0x01)`.

### Special cases

**Coordinate recovery.** Set `s₀ = 1`. The output will be the recovered coordinates of `A₀`.

**On-curve checking.** Do coordinate recovery and compare `y` coordinate.

**Addition.** Set `s₀ = s₁ = 1`, the output will be `A₀ + A₁`.

**Doubling.** Set `s₀ = 2`. The output will be `2 ⋅ A₀`. (Note: under current gas model this may be more costly than self-addition!)

**Scalar multiplication.** Set only `s₀` and `A₀`.

**Modular square root.** Set `α = s₀ = A = 0` the output will have `Cy² = β   mod  m`.

### Edge cases

* Non-prime moduli or too small modulus
* Field elements larger than modulus
* Curve has singular points (`4 α³ + 27 β² = 0`)
* Invalid sign bytes
* x coordinate not on curve
* Returning the point at infinity
* (Please add if you spot more)

## Rationale

**Generic Field and Curve.** Many important optimizations are independent of the field and curve used. Some missed specific optimizations are:

* Reductions specific to the binary structure of the field prime.
* Precomputation of Montgomery factors.
* Precomputation of multiples of certain popular points like the generator.
* Special point addition/doubling [formulas][formulas] for `α = -3`, `α = -1`, `α = 0`, `β = 0`.


[formulas]: https://www.hyperelliptic.org/EFD/g1p/auto-shortw.html

TODO: The special cases for `α` and `β` might be worth implementing and offered a gas discount.

**Compressed Coordinates.** Compressed coordinates allow contract to work with only `x` coordinates and sign bytes. It also prevents errors around points not being on-curve. Conversion to compressed coordinates is trivial.

**Linear Combination.** We could instead have a simple multiply `C = r ⋅ A`. In this case we would need a separate pre-compile for addition. In addition, a linear combination allows for optimizations that like Shamir's trick that are not available in a single scalar multiplication. ECDSA requires `s₀ ⋅ A₀ + s₁ ⋅ A₁` and would benefit from this.

The BN254 (aka alt_bn8) multiplication operation introduced by the [EIP-196][eip196] precompile only handles a single scalar multiplication. The missed performance is such that for two or more points it is cheaper to use EVM, as practically demonstrated by [Weierstrudel][ws].

[eip196]: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-196
[ws]: https://medium.com/aztec-protocol/huffing-for-crypto-with-weierstrudel-9c9568c06901

**Variable Time Math.** When called during a transaction, there is no assumption of privacy and no mitigations for side-channel attacks are necessary.

**Prime Fields.** This EIP is for fields of large characteristic. It does not cover Binary fields and other fields of non-prime characteristic.

**256-bit modulus.** This EIP is for field moduli less than `2^{256}`. This covers many of the popular curves while still having all parameters fit in a single EVM word.

TODO: Consider a double-word version. 512 bits would cover all known curves except E-521. In particular it will cover the NIST P-384 curve used by the Estonian e-Identity and the BLS12-381 curve used by [ZCash Sappling][sappling].

[sappling]: https://z.cash/blog/new-snark-curve/

**Short Weierstrass Curves.** This EIP is for fields specified in short Weierstrass form. While any curve can be converted to short Weierstrass form through a [substitution of variables][cov], this misses out on the performance advantages of those specific forms.

[cov]: https://safecurves.cr.yp.to/equation.html

## Backwards Compatibility

## Test Cases

## Implementation

There will be a reference implementation in Rust based on the existing libraries (in particular those by ZCash and The Matter Inc.).

The reference implementation will be production grade and compile to a native library with a C api and a webassembly version. Node developers are encouraged to use the reference implementation and can use either the rust library, the native C bindings or the webassembly module. Node developers can of course always decide to implement their own.

## References

This EIP overlaps in scope with

* [EIP-196](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-196): ecadd, ecmul for altbn128
* [EIP issue 603](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/603): ecadd, ecmul for SECP256k1.
* [EIP 665](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-665): ECDSA verify for ED25519.
* [EIP 1108](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1108): Optimize ecadd and ecmul for altbn128.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

