---
eip: 5071
title: NFT Token Acceptance Standard
author: Mihir Wadekar (@mw2000)
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-05-05
requires: 165
---

## Simple Summary

A standardized way to retrieve the types of ERC-20 tokens that are accepted by a particular NFT collection for buying and selling in a NFT Marketplace.

## Abstract

This standard allows contracts, such as NFTs that support [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) and [ERC-1155](./eip-1155.md) interfaces, to specify the permitted ERC20 tokens that can be used in a NFT marketplace to buy and sell the NFT from this collection. This would allow NFT creators to setup a wider economy by adding more use-cases to their own, or other ERC20 tokens. The interface would be similar to the [ERC-2981](./eip-2981.md) standard such that it will be completely voluntary for NFT marketplaces to implement this standard in their products. 

## Motivation
Buy/Sell transactions for NFTs on marketplaces often happen in a standard currency like ETH. Certain NFT Collections may want to enable payments in specific ERC20 tokens only, howwever specifying this on each and every NFT Marketplace is cumbersome and creates friction. Instead, this EIP proposes the creation of a standard interface to allow NFT marketplaces to easily obtain this information from the smart contract itself.

By allowing for only specific tokens to trade NFTs, an atomic use-case and economy can be created for the token.

A good example for this is ApeCoin and Otherside. If Otherdeeds were only tradeable in ApeCoin, it would add much more of a use-case to the token allowing the future Otherside game to run entirely on ApeCoin, along with trading. This is also similar to Roblox and trading items exclusively in Robux, and Fortnite and trading items exclusively in V-Bucks.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
RFC 2119.

**ERC-721 and ERC-1155 compliant contracts MAY implement this ERC for specifying which tokens they would want the NFTs to be transacted in.**


### Examples


#### Deploying an ERC-721 and signaling support for ERC-5071



#### Checking if the NFT being sold on your marketplace implemented this standard


## Rationale

### Create economy for token


### Allow creators to determine what tokens they receive royalties in


## Backwards Compatibility

This standard is compatible with current ERC-721 and ERC-1155 standards.

## Security Considerations

There are no security considerations related directly to the implementation of this standard.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
