---
eip: 2181
title: Increase Clique's DIFF_INTURN
author: Shelly Holloway (@soc1c)
discussions-to: https://github.com/goerli/eips-poa/issues/13
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2019-07-09
requires: 225
---

## Simple Summary

This document proposes a patch for the Clique proof-of-authority consensus engine that could be used by Ethereum testing and development networks in the future which improves performance and stability.

## Abstract

Edge-cases in Clique-based networks were discovered that eventually lead the chain to halt. One of the reasons is the difficulty value of in-turn blocks being only insignificantly higher than that of out-of-turn blocks. EIP-2181 addresses this and encourages Clique-based networks to upgrade the difficulty formula.

## Motivation

The _Kotti Classic_ and _Görli_ testnets running different implementations of the _Clique_ engine got stuck multiple times due to minor issues discovered. To increase the performance and stability of Clique-based networks, a series of proposals will be published to address this.

## Specification

This section specifies a protocol upgrade to the Clique engine. Activation schedule for existing Clique-based test networks:
- `BLOCK_NUMBER >= TBD` on Görli testnet
- `BLOCK_NUMBER >= TBD` on Kotti Classic testnet

At the specified `BLOCK_NUMBER`, change the block score (difficulty) calculation for blocks signed _in turn_ **`DIFF_INTURN`** to `7`. The block score for out-of-turn signers remains at `1` since it just needs to be an arbitrary baseline constant.

## Rationale

The **`DIFF_INTURN`** was increased from `2` to `7` to avoid situations where two different chain heads have the same total difficulty. This prevents the network from getting stuck by making in-turn blocks significantly more _substantial_ than out-of-turn blocks.

This measure was discussed and proposed in: [goerli/testnet/#57](https://github.com/goerli/testnet/issues/57)

A script to simulate different block scores under the assumption of network fragmentation is published at: [goerli/diff-simulation](https://github.com/goerli/diff-simulation)

## Test Cases

Test cases can be inherited from EIP-225 by acknowledging the block score changes with this proposal.

## Implementation

_TBD._

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
