EIP-1776: Legally Empowered Governance Tokens
Author	John D Storey
Discussions-To	
Status	Stagnant
Type	Standards Track
Category	ERC
Created	2020-09-08
Requires	20

Table of Contents
Simple Summary
Abstract
Motivation
Specification
ERC-2980 (Token Contract)
Whitelist and Frozenlist
Issuers
Revoke and Reassign
Rationale
Backwards Compatibility
Implementations
Security Considerations
Copyright
Simple Summary
An interface for asset tokens, compliant with Swiss Law and compatible with ERC-20.

Abstract
This new standard is an ERC-20 compatible token with restrictions that comply with an admin that can enact changes, and split payments based upon share of tokens owned.

Motivation
As governance models, mechanisms and technology continues this token allows for the token to not need to be re-minted or upgraded in order to be compliant by linking an admin such as trusted benefactor, lawyer, bot or artificial intelligence to enact the wishes of the DAO.

Specification
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

The words “asset” and “governance” or "utility" can be considered synonymous.

ERC-1776 (Token Contract)
interface ERC1776 extends ERC20 {
  
  /// @dev This emits when funds are minted
  event AdminMint(address from, address to, uint256 amount);

  /// @dev This emits when funds are burned
  event AdminBurn(address from, uint256 amount);

  /**
  * @dev getter to determine how much of the collective fund is available to the user
  */
  function userFundBalance(address _operator) external view returns (number);

}
The ERC-1776 extends ERC-20. Due to the indivisible nature of asset tokens, the decimals number MUST be zero.

Admin
A key role is played by the Admin. This figure has the permission to manage Token Details. Token holders can remove an admin with 50+% and likewise an Admin can give their power to another. 

Below is an example interface for the implementation of the Admin functionalities and follows closely Open Zepplin's Ownable contract with extended powers.

Interface Admin {

    function setName(string memory newName) public onlyOwner {
        _name = newName;
    }
    function setSymbol(string memory newSymbol) public onlyOwner {
        _symbol = newSymbol;
    }
    function setDocumentURI(string memory newURI) public onlyOwner {
        documentURI = newURI;
    }
}

Rationale
Allowing a third party fixes many problems faced when tokenizing a real world asset (RWA) that needs to interface with existing legal jurisdictions.  Included is the metadata needed to interface with NFT standards with the definition of a DocumentURI.

Backwards Compatibility
The contract will have the ability to be somewhat backwards compatible with both ERC20 and ERC721 contracts just in different ways.  The transfer function will be ERC20 compatible, but will have a global DocumentURI field found with the standard ERC721 contract even though each succusive token can also have it's own such as in ERC1155
This EIP does not introduce backward incompatibilities and is backward compatible with the older ERC-20 token standard. This standard allows the implementation of ERC-20 functions transfer, transferFrom, approve and allowance alongside to make a token fully compatible with ERC-20. The token MAY implement decimals() for backward compatibility with ERC-20. If implemented, it MUST always return 0.

Implementations
Although an official implementation of the ERC-1776 has not been presented, in the Specifications section some interfaces have been reported which, once implemented correctly and according to the reccomandations, allow to create an asset token compliant with this ERC.

Security Considerations
The security considerations mainly concern the role played by the Issuers. If they do not correctly manage their members and allow for profit through non-participation it could fall into a security classification although it is designed to be a utility DAO token.  As it is used and abuses found there may be fixes to prevent this.

Copyright
Business License 1.1

Citation
Please cite this document as:

John D. Storey, "EIP-1776: Legally Empowered Governance Token," Ethereum Improvement Proposals, no. 2980, September 2020. [Online serial]. Available: {{URL to EIP on github}}

Ethereum Improvement Proposals
