---
eip: 5757
title: Process for Approving External Resources
description: Requirements and process for allowing new sources of external resources
author: Sam Wilson (@SamWilsn)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-5757-process-for-approving-external-resources/11215
status: Draft
type: Meta
created: 2022-09-30
requires: 1
---

## Abstract

Ethereum improvement proposals (EIPs) occasionally link to resources external to this repository. This document sets out the requirements for sources that may be linked to, and the process for approving a new source.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

### Definitions

 - **Link**: Any method of referring to a resource, including: markdown links, anchor tags (`<a>`), images, citations of books/journals, and any other method of referencing content not in the current resource.
 - **Resource**: A web page, document, file, or other media that contains content.
 - **Source**: A publisher/chronicler of resources, like a standards body (eg. w3c) or a system of referring to documents (eg. Digital Object Identifier System).

### Requirements for Sources

Permissible sources **SHOULD NOT** obviously allow redistributing their resources as part of the EIP repository. If a source does obviously allow redistribution of resources, include those resources in an appropriate directory within this repository and link to those copies instead. The common exception to this rule are git repositories under the Ethereum organization.

Permissible sources **MUST** provide a method of uniquely identifying a particular revision of a resource. Examples of such methods may include git commit hashes, version numbers, or publication dates.

Permissible sources **MUST** have a proven history of availability. A source existing for at least ten years and reliably serving resources would be sufficient—but not necessary—to satisfy this requirement.

Permissible sources **MUST NOT** charge a fee for accessing resources.

### Source Removal

Any approved source that ceases to satisfy the above requirements **MUST** be removed from [EIP-1](./eip-1.md), and its proposal (as described below) **MUST** be moved to a `status` of `Draft` or `Withdrawn`.

Finalized EIPs (eg. those in the `Final` or `Withdrawn` statuses) **SHOULD NOT** be updated to remove links to these sources.

Non-Finalized EIPs **MUST** remove links to these sources before changing statuses.

### Source Approval

#### Proposal

Each potential permitted source **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.

These EIPs **MUST** describe how the source meets the requirements described above.

These EIPs **MUST** include the markup for creating a link that satisfies all the above requirements and an example of such a link.

When opened, these EIPs:

 - **MUST** have a `status` of `Draft`.

Throughout their lifetime, these EIPs:

 - **MUST** have a `type` of `Meta`;
 - **MUST** have a `title` beginning with `External Source - ` followed by a unique name describing the source; and
 - **MAY** include links to any resources relevant to the approval process (regardless of source).

[A template for these proposals is available](../assets/eip-5757/template.md).

#### Review

Should the editors determine that a source meets the requirements above, its proposal **SHALL** be granted a `status` of `Living`, and EIP-1 **MUST** be updated to show the new source.

## Rationale

### Redistribution

It is much easier to meet the process' goals for immutability if the resource is subject to this repository's tooling. Likewise, it is much easier to ensure availability if the resources are distributed alongside their EIPs. Therefore, if a source allows it, prefer redistribution in this repository.

### Unique Identifiers

If it is impossible to uniquely identify a version of a resource, it becomes impractical to track changes, which makes it difficult to ensure immutability.

### Availability

If it is possible to implement a standard without a linked resource, then the linked resource is unnecessary. If it is impossible to implement a standard without a linked resource, then that resource must be available for implementers.

### Free Access

The Ethereum ecosystem is built on openness and free access, and the EIP process should follow those principles.

### `Living` Status

The internet is not an immutable space, as much as this process attempts to assert that it is. External source EIPs are given the `Living` status because their link formats, markup, and justification may change over time, while `Final` proposals cannot be modified.

### One Source per Proposal

Adding any source is likely to be contentious and involve long debate. If each source is proposed in its own EIP, they each will get a `discussions-to` link to focus and preserve discussion.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
