---
eip: 7735
title: Gas Fee Sponsorship
description: Enable one Ethereum address to sponsor gas fees for another by authorizing and co-signing transactions.
author: Toni Dumančić (@toni-d-e-v)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7745/7765
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-07-04
---
## Abstract

This EIP proposes a mechanism for one Ethereum address (Address A) to sponsor gas fees for another address (Address B) by authorizing and co-signing transactions. This mechanism enables efficient management of gas fees, particularly useful for payment processors, Web3 games, and decentralized applications (DApps).

## Motivation

Current Ethereum transactions involving gas fees require each transaction initiator to possess enough Ether to cover associated costs. This requirement complicates operations for payment processors, dApps, and Web3 games, as managing gas funds across multiple addresses can be cumbersome and inefficient. Gas fee sponsorship simplifies this process by allowing one address to pre-authorize and cover gas fees for transactions initiated by another address, reducing operational friction and enhancing usability.

## Specification

### Off-chain Process

1. **Gas Approval:**
   - Address A approves gas fees off-chain by signing transaction details using cryptographic methods such as ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm).
   
2. **Signature Transmission:**
   - Address B receives signed approval data from Address A, ensuring secure transmission and verification of authorization.

### On-chain Process

1. **Transaction Execution:**
   - Address B sends transactions to the Ethereum network, with gas fees deducted from Address A's balance as per the pre-approved authorization.

## Rationale

Gas fee sponsorship streamlines Ethereum transactions by reducing the number of transactions and complexity associated with managing gas funds. By centralizing gas fee management at one address (Address A), this proposal optimizes gas usage across various applications, promoting scalability and usability.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal does not introduce backward incompatibilities with existing Ethereum protocols. It integrates seamlessly with current transaction mechanisms and smart contract interactions, ensuring interoperability across Ethereum platforms.

## Reference Implementation

An example implementation demonstrating gas fee sponsorship will accompany this EIP, providing developers and stakeholders with a reference for understanding and implementing the proposed mechanism.

## Security Considerations

Gas fee sponsorship introduces security considerations related to:

- Secure transmission and storage of authorization signatures.
- Prevention of unauthorized access and misuse of gas fee sponsorship capabilities.
- Mitigation of potential attack vectors exploiting gas sponsorship mechanisms.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/f547d9900a72607fd855e66fad1ea36f707533b0/LICENSE.md).
