---
eip: 7975
title: eth/70 - partial block receipt lists
description: Adds a facility for paginating block receipts in the p2p protocol
author: Felix Lange <fjl@ethereum.org>, Jochem Brouwer (@jochem-brouwer), Giulio Rebuffo (@Giulio2002)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7975-eth-70-partial-block-receipt-lists/24658
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Networking
created: 2025-06-16
requires: 7642, 7825
---

## Abstract

This EIP modifies the 'eth' p2p protocol to allow requesting partial block receipt lists.

## Motivation

As Ethereum moves toward a higher block gas limit on mainnet, the worst-case total size of
a block receipts list also becomes larger, and may eventually exceed the 10MiB message size
limit commonly applied in clients. This can lead to sync failures.

## Specification

Modify the encoding for receipts in the `Receipts (0x10)` message as follows:

- (eth/69): `[request-id: P, [[receipt₁, receipt₂], ...]]`

- (eth/70): `[request-id: P, lastBlockIncomplete: {0,1}, [[receipt₁, receipt₂], ...]]`

If the `lastBlockIncomplete` flag is set to true (`1`), the last receipt list does not
contain all receipts of the block, and the client will have to request the remaining
receipts of that block in a new request.

To support such partial queries, we also modify the `GetReceipts (0x0f)` message:

- (eth/69): `[request-id: P, [blockhash₁: B_32, blockhash₂: B_32, ...]]`

- (eth/70): `[request-id: P, firstBlockReceiptIndex: P, [blockhash₁: B_32, blockhash₂: B_32, ...]]`

For the first block in the list of requested block hashes, the server shall omit receipts
up to the `firstBlockReceiptIndex` from the response.

Downloading block receipts across multiple messages creates new attack surface. Partial
receipt lists cannot be verified against the block header, so in responses with
`lastBlockIncomplete = 1`, the last receipts list must be validated in a different way:

- Verify the total number of delivered receipts matches the count of transactions.
- Verify the size of each receipt against the gas limit of the corresponding transaction,
  i.e. reject if it is larger than gaslimit/8.
- Verify the total downloaded receipts size is no larger than allowed by the block gas limit.

<!-- Needs exact formula -->

## Rationale

Since [EIP-7825] caps the gas limit of a single transaction to 30M gas, a single
transaction receipt will always be limited in size. Specifically, a transaction can
produce at most 30000000/8 = 3.75MiB of log data.

However, a block can contain contain multiple transactions, and thus the entire block
receipts list can be much larger. At a block gas limit of ~83M, the `Receipts` message
could exceed 10MiB. Clients typically reject messages above this size because their
validity can only be determined after fetching the complete message.

For a `Receipts` message, each block receipts list is validated by checking the full list
against the tree root stored in the block header. When downloading a paginated list across
multiple requests, the client must potentially buffer more than 10MB of unvalidated input.
This cannot be avoided, since the protocol allows receipt lists of such size at a high
block gas limit. However, we can at least bound the input size by applying sanity checks
as recommended in the specification section.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP changes the eth protocol and requires rolling out a new version, `eth/70`.
Supporting multiple versions of a wire protocol is possible. Rolling out a new version
does not break older clients immediately, since they can keep using protocol version
`eth/69`.

This EIP does not change consensus rules of the EVM and does not require a hard fork.

## Security Considerations

None

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).

[EIP-7825]: ./eip-7825.md
