---
eip: 6475
title: SSZ Optional
description: New SSZ type to represent optional values
author: Etan Kissling (@etan-status), Zahary Karadjov (@zah)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-6475-ssz-optional/12891
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-02-09
---

## Abstract

This EIP introduces a new [Simple Serialize (SSZ) type](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/67c2f9ee9eb562f7cc02b2ff90d92c56137944e1/ssz/simple-serialize.md) to represent `Optional[T]` values.

## Motivation

Optional values are currently only representable in SSZ using workarounds. Adding proper support provides these benefits:

1. **Better readability:** SSZ structures with optional values can be represented with ideomatic types of the underlying programming language, e.g., `Optional[T]` in Python, making them easier to interact with.

2. **Compact serialization:** SSZ serialization can rely on the binary nature of optional values; they either exist or they don't. This allows more compact serialization than using alternative approaches based on workarounds.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Type definition

`Optional[T]` is defined as a type that can represent:

- A value of SSZ type `T`
- Absence of a value, indicated by `None`

### Default value

The default value of `Optional[T]` is `None`.

### Serialization

```python
if value is None:
    return b""
else:
    return b"\x01" + serialize(value)
```

### Deserialization

The deserialization of an `Optional[T]` depends on the input length:

- If the input length is 0, the value is `None`.
- Otherwise, the first byte of the deserialization scope must be checked to be `0x01`, the remainder of the scope is deserialized same as `T`.

### Merkleization

An `Optional[T]` is merkleized as a `List[T, 1]`.

- If the value is `None`, the list length is `0`.
- Otherwise, the list length is `1`, and the first list element contains the underlying value.

## Rationale

### Why not `Union[None, T]`?

`Union[None, T]` leaves ambiguity about the intention whether the type may be extended in the future, i.e., `Union[None, T, U]`.

Furthermore, SSZ Union types are currently not used in any final Ethereum specification and do not have a finalized design themselves. If the only use case is a workaround for lack of `Optional[T]`, the simpler `Optional[T]` type is sufficient, and support for general unions could be delayed until really needed. Note that the design of `Optional[T]` could be used as basis for a more general `Union`.

### Why not `List[T, 1]`?

The serialization is less compact for variable-length `T`, due to the extra offset table at the beginning of the list to indicate the list length.

## Backwards Compatibility

`Union[None, T]` and `List[T, 1]` workarounds are not used at this time to represent `Optional[T]`.

## Test Cases

See [EIP assets](../assets/eip-6475/tests.py).

## Reference Implementation

- **Python:** See [EIP assets](../assets/eip-6475/optional.py), based on `protolambda/remerkleable`
- **Nim:** `status-im/nim-ssz-serialization`

## Security Considerations

None

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
