---
eip: 2645
title: Hierarchical Deterministic Wallet for Layer-2
author: Tom Brand <tom@starkware.co>, Louis Guthmann <louis@starkware.co>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/hierarchical-deterministic-wallet-for-computation-integrity-proof-cip-layer-2/4286
status: Stagnant
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2020-05-13
---

## Simple Summary
In the context of Computation Integrity Proof (CIP) Layer-2 solutions such as ZK-Rollups, users are required to sign messages on new elliptic curves optimized for those environnements. We leverage existing work on Key Derivation ([BIP32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki), [BIP39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki) and [BIP44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki)) to define an efficient way to securely produce CIP L2s private keys, as well as creating domain separation between Layer-2 applications.

## Abstract
We provide a Derivation Path allowing a user to derive hierarchical keys for Layer-2 solutions depending on the zk-technology, the application, the user’s Layer-1 address, as well as an efficient grinding method to enforce the private key distribution within the curve domain. The propose Derivation Path is defined as follow
```
m / purpose' / layer' / application' / eth_address_1' / eth_address_2' / index
```

## Motivation
In the context of Computation Integrity Proof (CIP) Layer-2 solutions such as ZK-Rollups, users are required to sign messages on new elliptic curves optimized for those environments. Extensive work has been done to make it secure on Bitcoin via [BIP32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki), [BIP39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki) and [BIP44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki). These protocols are the standard for wallets in the entire industry, independent of the underlying blockchain. As Layer-2 solutions are taking off, it is a necessary requirement to maintain the same standard and security in this new space.

## Specification
Starkware keys are derived with the following [BIP43](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0043.mediawiki)-compatible derivation path, with direct inspiration from [BIP44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki):
```
m / purpose' / layer' / application' / eth_address_1' / eth_address_2' / index
```
where:
* `m` - the seed.
* `purpose` - `2645` (the number of this EIP).
* `layer` - the 31 lowest bits of sha256 on the layer name. Serve as a domain separator between different technologies. In the context of `starkex`, the value would be `579218131`.
* `application` - the 31 lowest bits of sha256 of the application name. Serve as a domain separator between different applications. In the context of DeversiFi in June 2020, it is the 31 lowest bits of sha256(starkexdvf) and the value would be `1393043894`.
* `eth_address_1 / eth_address_2` - the first and second 31 lowest bits of the corresponding eth_address.
* `index` - to allow multiple keys per eth_address.

As example, the expected path for address 0x0000....0000 assuming seed `m` and index 0 in the context of DeversiFi in June 2020: `m/2645'/579218131'/1393043894'/0'/0'/0`

The key derivation should follow the following algorithm
```
N = 2**256
n = Layer2 curve order
path = stark derivation path
BIP32() = Official BIP-0032 derivation function on secp256k1
hash = SHA256
i = 0
root_key = BIP32(path)
while True:
	key = hash(root_key|i)
	if (key < (N - (N % n))):
		return key % n
	i++
```
This algorithm has been defined to maintain efficiency on existing restricted devices.

Nota Bene: At each round, the probability for a key to be greater than (N - (N % n)) is < 2^(-5).

## Rationale
This EIP specifies two aspects of keys derivation in the context of Hierarchical Wallets:
- Derivation Path
- Grinding Algorithm to enforce a uniform distribution over the elliptic curve.
The derivation path is defined to allow efficient keys separation based on technology and application while maintaining a 1-1 relation with the Layer-1 wallet. In such a way, losing EIP-2645 wallets falls back to losing the Layer-1 wallet.

## Backwards Compatibility
This standard complies with BIP43.

## Security Considerations
This EIP has been defined to maintain separation of keys while providing foolproof logic on key derivation.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
