---
eip: 7222
title: Count Contract Standard
description:  A "count contract" refers to a smart contract on the Ethereum blockchain designed to manage and keep track of a numerical count or quantity. This type of contract is often used for various applications, including voting systems, scorekeeping, or any scenario where a numerical value needs to be incremented or decremented in a secure and transparent manner.
author: Yogesh Sahu
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-6963-multi-injected-provider-interface-aka-mipi/14076
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Interface
created: 2023-01-31
---

## Abstract

This EIP proposes a standard interface for count contracts on the Ethereum blockchain. The standard defines basic functionalities for incrementing and retrieving counts, promoting interoperability between different implementations.

## Motivation

Count contracts are simple, yet widely used components in various decentralized applications. Having a standard interface will make it easier for developers to integrate and interact with different count contracts, fostering a more modular and interoperable Ethereum ecosystem.

## Specification

// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

interface CountStandard {
    event CountIncreased(uint256 newCount);

    function increaseCount() external;
    function getCount() external view returns (uint256);
}

## Rationale
The proposed interface includes two functions: increaseCount to increment the count and getCount to retrieve the current count. An event CountIncreased is emitted when the count is increased.

### Interfaces

Standardizing an interface for provider information (`EIP6963ProviderInfo`) allows a DApp to determine all information necessary to populate a user-friendly wallet selection modal. This is particularly useful for DApps that rely on libraries such as Web3Modal, RainbowKit, Web3-Onboard, or ConnectKit to programmatically generate such selection modals.

Regarding the announced provider interface (`EIP6963ProviderDetail`), it was important to leave the [EIP-1193](./eip-1193.md) provider interface untouched for backwards compatibility; this allows conformant DApps to interface with wallets conforming to either, and for Wallets conformant to this spec to still inject [EIP-1193](./eip-1193.md) providers for legacy DApps. Note that a legacy dapp or a DApp conformant with this spec connecting to a legacy wallet cannot guarantee the correct wallet will be selected if multiple are present.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP doesn't require supplanting `window.ethereum`, so it doesn't directly break existing applications that cannot update to this method of Wallet discovery. However, it is RECOMMENDED DApps implement this EIP to ensure discovery of multiple Wallet Providers and SHOULD disable `window.ethereum` usage except as a fail-over when discovery fails. Similarly, Wallets SHOULD keep compatibility of `window.ethereum` to ensure backwards compatibility for DApps that have not implemented this EIP. In order to prevent the previous issues of namespace collisions, it's also RECOMMENDED that wallets inject their provider object under a wallet specific namespace then proxy the object into the `window.ethereum` namespace.


## Implementation
A reference implementation can be found in the CountContract.sol file.

## Backwards Compatibility
This standard is backward compatible with contracts implementing the proposed interface.

## Test Cases
Test cases and sample implementations can be found in the tests directory.

## Security Considerations
The count contract should implement proper access controls to restrict who can modify the count.
Ensure gas optimizations to minimize transaction costs for count modifications.

## Copyright
This work is placed in the public domain.

