---
eip: 5450
title: EOF - Stack Validation
description: Deploy-time validation of stack usage for EOF functions.
author: Andrei Maiboroda (@gumb0), Paweł Bylica (@chfast), Alex Beregszaszi (@axic), Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-5450-eof-stack-validation/10410
status: Review
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2022-08-12
requires: 3540, 3670, 4200, 4750
---

## Abstract

Introduce extended validation of EOF code sections to guarantee that neither stack underflow nor overflow can happen during execution of validated contracts.

## Motivation

The current EVM performs a number of validity checks for each executed instruction, such as checking
for instruction being defined, stack overflow and underflow, and enough amount of gas remaining.

This EIP minimizes the number of such checks required at run-time
by verifying that no exceptional conditions can happen
and preventing the execution and deployment of any invalid code.

The operand stack validation provides several benefits:

- removes the run-time stack underflow check for all instructions,
- removes the run-time stack overflow check for all instructions except `CALLF` and `JUMPF` (`JUMPF` introduced in a separate EIP) ,
- ensures that execution terminates with one of the terminating instructions,
- prevents deployment of code with unreachable instructions, thereby discouraging the use of code sections for data storage.

It also has some disadvantages:

- adds constraints to the code structure (similar to JVM, CPython bytecode, WebAssembly, SPIR-V and others); however, these constraints can be lifted in a backward-compatible manner if they are shown to be user-unfriendly,
- it is natural to implement stack validation as a second validation pass; however, it is not strictly required and validation's computational and space complexity remains linear in any implementation variant.

The guarantees created by these validation rules also improve the feasibility of Ahead-Of-Time and Just-In-Time compilation of EVM code. Single pass transpilation passes can be safely executed with the code validation and advanced stack/register handling can be applied with the stack height validations. While not as impactful to a Mainnet validator node that is bound mostly by storage state sizes, these can significantly speed up witness validation and other non-Mainnet use cases.

## Specification

### Code validation

*Remark:* We rely on the notions of *operand stack* and *type section* as defined by [EIP-4750](./eip-4750.md).

Each code section is validated independently.

#### Instructions validation

In the first validation phase defined in [EIP-3670](./eip-3670.md) (and extended by [EIP-4200](./eip-4200.md) and [EIP-4750](./eip-4750.md)) instructions are inspected independently to check if their opcodes and immediate values are valid.

#### Operand stack validation

In the second validation phase control-flow analysis is performed on the code.

*Operand stack height* here refers to the number of stack values accessible by this function, i.e. it does not take into account values of caller functions' frames (but does include this function's inputs). Note that validation procedure does not require actual operand stack implementation, but only to keep track of its height.

*Terminating instructions* refers to the instructions either:

- ending function execution: `RETF`, `JUMPF`, or
- ending call frame execution: `STOP`, `RETURN`, `RETURNCODE`, `REVERT`, `INVALID`.

*note: `JUMPF` and `RETURNCODE` are introduced in separate EIPs.*

*Forward jump* refers to any of `RJUMP`/`RJUMPI`/`RJUMPV` instruction with relative offset greater than or equal to 0. *Backwards jump* refers to any of `RJUMP`/`RJUMPI`/`RJUMPV` instruction with relative offset less than 0, including jumps to the same jump instruction.

Instructions in the code are scanned in a single linear pass over the code. For each instruction the operand stack height bounds are recorded as `stack_height_min` and `stack_height_max`.

The first instruction's recorded stack height bounds are initialized to be equal to the number of inputs to the function type matching the code (`stack_height_min = stack_height_max = type[code_section_index].inputs`).

For each instruction:

1. **Check** if this instruction has recorded stack height bounds. If it does not, it means it was neither referenced by previous forward jump, nor is part of sequential instruction flow, and this code fails validation.
   - It is a prerequisite to validation algorithm, and code generators are required to order code basic blocks in a way that no block is referenced only by backwards jump. Any program can satisfy this requirement by ordering code basic blocks by the reverse postorder.
2. Determine the effect the instruction has on the operand stack:
   1. **Check** if the recorded stack height bounds satisfy the instruction requirements. Specifically:
      - for `CALLF` instruction the recorded stack height lower bound must be at least the number of inputs of the called function according to its type defined in the type section,
      - for `RETF` instruction both the recorded lower and upper bound must be equal and must be exactly the number of outputs of the function matching the code,
      - for `JUMPF` into returning function both the recorded lower and upper bound must equal exactly `type[current_section_index].outputs + type[target_section_index].inputs - type[target_section_index].outputs`,
      - for `JUMPF` into non-returning function the recorded stack height lower bound must be at least the number of inputs of the target function according to its type defined in the type section,
      - for any other instruction the recorded stack height lower bound must be at least the number of inputs required by instruction,
      - there is no additional check for terminating instructions other than `RETF` and `JUMPF`, this implies that extra items left on stack at instruction ending EVM execution are allowed.
   2. For `CALLF` and `JUMPF` **check** for possible stack overflow: if recorded stack height upper bound is greater than `1024 - types[target_section_index].max_stack_increase`, validation fails.
   3. Compute new stack height bounds after the instruction execution. Upper and lower bound are updated by the same value:
      - after `CALLF` stack height bounds are adjusted by adding `types[target_section_index].outputs - types[target_section_index].inputs`,
      - after any other non-terminating instruction stack height bounds are adjusted by subtracting the number of instruction inputs and adding the number of instruction outputs,
      - terminating instructions do not need to update stack height bounds.
3. Determine the list of successor instructions that can follow the current instructions:
   1. The next instruction if the current instruction is not a terminating instruction nor unconditional jump (`RJUMP`).
   2. All the current instruction targets if the current instruction is a conditional (`RJUMPI` or `RJUMPV`) or unconditional jump (`RJUMP`).
4. For each successor instruction:
   1. **Check** if the instruction is present in the code (i.e. execution must not "fall off" the code).
   2. If the successor is reached via forwards jump or sequential flow from previous instruction:
      1. If the instruction does not have stack height bounds recorded (being visited for the first time), record the instruction stack height bound as the value computed in 2.3.
      2. Otherwise, instruction has been already visited (by previously seen forward jump). Update this instruction's recorded stack height bounds so that they contain the bounds computed in 2.3, i.e. `target_stack_min = min(target_stack_min, current_stack_min)` and `target_stack_max = max(target_stack_max, current_stack_max)`, where `(target_stack_min, target_stack_max)` are successor bounds and `(current_stack_min, current_stack_max)` are bounds computed in 2.3.
   3. If the successor is reached via backwards jump, **check** if the recorded stack height bounds equal the value computed in 2.3. Validation fails if they are not equal, i.e. we see backwards jump to a different stack height.

After all instructions are visited, determine the function maximum operand stack height increase:

1. Compute the maximum stack height `max_stack_height` as the maximum of all recorded stack height upper bounds.
2. Compute the maximum stack height increase `max_stack_increase` as `max_stack_height - type[current_section_index].inputs`.
3. **Check** if the maximum stack height increase `max_stack_increase` matches the value corresponding code section's within the type section: `types[current_section_index].max_stack_increase`.

*Note: Although we check only that `max_stack_increase` matches the type section definition, which guarantees that it does not exceed 1023 by EOF header definition, it is also guaranteed that `max_stack_height` does not exceed 1024, because otherwise validation of `CALLF` and `JUMPF` into this section would fail at operand stack overflow check. Every section is required to have `CALLF` or `JUMPF` targeting it, except 0th section (non-reachable sections are not allowed). 0th section is required to have 0 inputs, which implies `max_stack_increase` equals `max_stack_height`.*

The computational and space complexity of this pass is *O(len(code))*. Each instruction is visited at most once.

### Execution

Given the deploy-time validation guarantees, an EVM implementation is not required anymore to have run-time stack underflow nor overflow checks for each executed instruction. The exception is the `CALLF` and `JUMPF` performing operand stack overflow check for the entire called function.

## Rationale

### Properties of validated code

Any code section validated according to operand stack validation has the following properties:

1. There are no unreachable instructions
2. There are no instructions reachable only via backwards jump
3. Operand stack underflow cannot happen.
4. Operand stack overflow can only happen at `CALLF` or `JUMPF` instruction.
5. Multiple forward jump instructions executing at different stack heights may target the same instruction; the stack of target basic block is validated for all possible heights.
6. Any backwards jump instruction can only target an instruction that is executed with equal stack height; this prevents deployment of the loops with unbounded stack pushing or popping.
7. Final instruction in the code section is either terminating instruction or `RJUMP`.

### Stack overflow check only in CALLF/JUMPF

In this EIP, we provide a more efficient variant of the EVM where stack overflow check is performed only in `CALLF` and `JUMPF` instructions using the called function's `max_stack_height` information. This decreases flexibility of an EVM program because `max_stack_height` corresponds to the worst-case control-flow path in the function.

### Unreachable code

The operand stack validation algorithm rejects any code having any unreachable instructions. This check can be performed very cheaply. It prevents deploying degenerated code. Moreover, it enables combining instruction validation and operand stack validation into single pass.

### Clean stack upon termination

It is currently required that the operand stack is empty (in the current function context) after the `RETF` instruction.
Otherwise, the `RETF` semantic would be more complicated. For `n` function outputs and `s` the stack height at `RETF` the EVM would have to erase `s-n` non-top stack items and move the `n` stack items to the place of erased ones. Cost of such operation may be relatively cheap but is not constant.
However, lifting the requirement and modifying the `RETF` semantic as described above is backward
compatible and can be easily introduced in the future.

### More restrictive stack validation

Originally another variant of stack validation was proposed, where instead of linear scan of the code section, all code paths were examined by following the target(s) of every jump instruction in a breadth-first-search manner, tracking stack height for each visited instruction and checking that for every possible code path to a particular instruction its stack height remains constant.

The advantage of this variant would be somewhat simpler algorithm (we would not need to track stack height bounds, but only a single stack height value for each instruction) and no extra requirement for ordering of code basic blocks (see below).

However, compiler teams opposed to such restrictive stack height requirements. One prominent pattern used by compilers which wouldn't be possible is jumping to terminating helpers (code blocks ending with `RETURN` or `REVERT`) from different stack heights. This is common for example for a series of `assert` statements, each one compiled to a `RJUMPI` into a shared terminating helper. Enforcing constant stack requirement would mean that before jumping to such helper, extra items on the stack have to be popped, and this noticeably increases code size and consumed gas, and would defeat the purpose of extracting these common terminating sequences into a helper.

### Ordering of basic blocks

The prerequisite to stack validation algorithm is ordering of code basic blocks in a way that no block is referenced only by backwards jump.

This is required to make it possible to examine each instruction in one linear pass over the code section. Forward pass over the code section allows for the algorithm to "expand" each forward jump target's stack height bounds and still keep the complexity linear. Trying to do jump target stack bounds expansion while scanning the code in the breadth-first-search manner would require to re-examine entire code path after its stack height bounds are expanded, which would result in quadratic complexity.

This requirement is not unique to EOF but also present is some low-level IRs like SPIR-V and LLVM MIR.

## Backwards Compatibility

This change requires a "network upgrade," since it modifies consensus rules.

It poses no risk to backwards compatibility, as it is introduced only for EOF1 contracts, for which deploying undefined instructions is not allowed, therefore there are no existing contracts using these instructions. The new instructions are not introduced for legacy bytecode (code which is not EOF formatted).

## Security Considerations

As mentioned above, the proposed validation algorithm has linear computational and space complexity and its cost is covered by the transaction data costs [EIP-2028](./eip-2028).

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
