---
eip: 6466
title: SSZ receipts
description: Migration of RLP receipts to SSZ
author: Etan Kissling (@etan-status), Gajinder Singh (@g11tech), Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-6466-ssz-receipts/12884
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-02-08
requires: 658, 2718, 6404, 7495, 7702, 7919
---

## Abstract

This EIP defines a migration process of [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) Recursive-Length Prefix (RLP) receipts to [Simple Serialize (SSZ)](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/b3e83f6691c61e5b35136000146015653b22ed38/ssz/simple-serialize.md)

## Motivation

RLP receipts have a number of shortcomings:

1. **Limited proving support:** Due to receipt data being linearly hashed as part of the `receipts_root` Merkle-Patricia Trie (MPT), it is not possible to efficiently proof individual parts of receipts, such as logs. Requiring the full receipt data to be present can be prohibitive for smart contract based applications such as L2 fraud proofs or client applications verifying log data.

2. **Unnecessary statefulness:** [EIP-658](./eip-658.md) replaced the intermediate post-state `root` from receipts with a boolean `status` code. However, `cumulativeGasUsed` is similarly stateful, unnecessarily complicating efforts to execute transactions in parallel. Furthermore, multiple receipts are required to verify the effective gas used by an individual transaction.

3. **Incomplete data:** JSON-RPC provides `from`, `gasUsed`, and `contractAddress` fields for receipts, but the on-chain receipt does not contain the required information to verify them.

4. **Inefficient logs bloom:** The logs bloom mechanism is inefficient due to its high false positive rate. It does not find enough practical use to warrant its high storage requirement, and should be removed.

This EIP defines a universal receipt format based on SSZ to address these concerns.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Existing definitions

Definitions from existing specifications that are used throughout this document are replicated here for reference.

| Name | SSZ equivalent |
| - | - |
| [`Root`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/b3e83f6691c61e5b35136000146015653b22ed38/specs/phase0/beacon-chain.md#custom-types) | `Bytes32` |
| [`ExecutionAddress`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/b3e83f6691c61e5b35136000146015653b22ed38/specs/bellatrix/beacon-chain.md#custom-types) | `Bytes20` |
| [`GasAmount`](./eip-6404.md#normalized-transactions) | `uint64` |

### `Receipt` container

All receipts are represented as a single, normalized SSZ container. The definition uses the `StableContainer[N]` SSZ type and `Optional[T]` as defined in [EIP-7495](./eip-7495.md).

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `MAX_TOPICS_PER_LOG` | `4` | `LOG0` through `LOG4` opcodes allow 0-4 topics per log |
| `MAX_RECEIPT_FIELDS` | `uint64(2**5)` (= 32) | Maximum number of fields to which `Receipt` can ever grow in the future |

```python
class Log(Container):
    address: ExecutionAddress
    topics: List[Bytes32, MAX_TOPICS_PER_LOG]
    data: ProgressiveByteList

class StableReceipt(StableContainer[MAX_RECEIPT_FIELDS]):
    from_: Optional[ExecutionAddress]
    gas_used: Optional[GasAmount]
    contract_address: Optional[ExecutionAddress]
    logs: Optional[ProgressiveList[Log]]

    # EIP-658
    status: Optional[boolean]

    # EIP-7702
    authorities: Optional[ProgressiveList[ExecutionAddress]]

class Receipt(Profile[StableReceipt]):
    from_: ExecutionAddress
    gas_used: GasAmount
    contract_address: Optional[ExecutionAddress]
    logs: ProgressiveList[Log]

    # EIP-658
    status: boolean

    # EIP-7702
    authorities: Optional[ProgressiveList[ExecutionAddress]]
```

### `Receipt` construction

Receipts are constructed as follows.

| Field | Description |
| - | - |
| `from` | The transaction sender's address |
| `gas_used` | How much gas this individual transaction used. Replaces `cumulative_gas_used` |
| `contract_address` | For transactions deploying a contract, the new contract address |
| `logs` | Logs emitted during transaction execution |
| `status` | [EIP-658](./eip-658.md) transaction status code |
| `authorities` | For transactions with an authorization list, the list of [EIP-7702](./eip-7702.md) `authority` addresses. Non-successful authorizations are represented with an all-zero address |

The `logs_bloom` and intermediate state `root` (Homestead scheme) are not present in SSZ receipts.

### Execution block header changes

The [execution block header's `receipts-root`](https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/5713591d0366da78a913a811c7502d9ca91d29a8/caps/eth.md#block-encoding-and-validity) is transitioned from MPT to SSZ.

```python
receipts = ProgressiveList[Receipt](
    receipt_0, receipt_1, receipt_2, ...)

block_header.receipts_root = receipts.hash_tree_root()
```

### JSON-RPC API

Transaction receipt objects in the context of the JSON-RPC API are extended to include:

- `authorities`: `Array of DATA|null` - Array of `DATA` entries each containing 20 Bytes, corresponding to the receipt's `authorities` field

Within `logs`, the `logIndex` field is removed as it cannot be efficiently validated. This includes responses pertaining to historical logs.

The `logsBloom` field is no longer returned for new receipts. It continues to be returned for historical receipts conforming to earlier schemes.

`from`, `gasUsed`, and `contractAddress` are already provided via JSON-RPC and are left unchanged.

### Consensus `ExecutionPayload` changes

When building a consensus `ExecutionPayload`, the [`receipts_root`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/b3e83f6691c61e5b35136000146015653b22ed38/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#executionpayload) is now based on the `Receipt` type, changing the type of `receipts_root` from an MPT [`Hash32`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/b3e83f6691c61e5b35136000146015653b22ed38/specs/phase0/beacon-chain.md#custom-types) to an SSZ [`Root`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/b3e83f6691c61e5b35136000146015653b22ed38/specs/phase0/beacon-chain.md#custom-types).

```python
class ExecutionPayload(Container):
    ...
    receipts_root: Root
    ...

class ExecutionPayloadHeader(Container):
    ...
    receipts_root: Root
    ...
```

```python
payload_header.receipts_root = payload.receipts_root
```

## Rationale

Switching to a single, unified and forward compatible receipt format within execution blocks reduces implementation complexity for client applications and smart contracts. Individual chunks of receipt data can now be verified, simplifying implementation of bridges.

Light clients can now efficiently verify a receipt's `from`, `gas_used`, and `authorities`, which previously required obtaining the corresponding transaction data and additional receipts. Execution layer implementations no longer have to compute signer addresses using the expensive `ecrecover` mechanism when backfilling / serving historical receipt data.

Removal of `logs_bloom` reduces storage cost for receipts by 259 bytes per receipt.

## Backwards Compatibility

Applications that rely on the replaced MPT `receipts_root` in the block header require migration to the SSZ `receipts_root`.

Applications using verified `cumulativeGasUsed` values have to compute the value from prior receipts.

Applications relying on the `logsBloom` will have to swap to an out-of-protocol mechanism for filtering logs, or fall back to processing the complete set of receipts. As the `logsBloom` mechanism was prohibitively inefficient for light clients, its removal is unlikely to have a significant impact.

Applications relying on the `logIndex` have to compute this value from the full receipt data. Note that verifying applications already have to do this.

RLP and SSZ receipts may clash when encoded. It is essential to use only a single format within one channel.

## Security Considerations

None

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
