---
eip: 5269
title: EIP/ERC Detection and Discovery
description: An interface to identify if major behavior or optional behavior specified in an ERC is supported for a given caller.
author: Zainan Victor Zhou (@xinbenlv)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/erc5269-human-readable-interface-detection/9957
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-07-15
requires: 5750
---

## Abstract

An interface that returns true or false when queried by ERC numbers, if it implement certain ERC number.

## Motivation

This EIP is created as a supplement to and competing standard for against [EIP-165](./eip-165.md).

Here are the major differences between this EIP and [EIP-165](./eip-165.md).

1. [EIP-165](./eip-165.md) uses hash of method signature which basically declares the existence of method or list of methods,
therefore it requires a method to *exist* in the first place. In some case, some ERCs interface are not represented in the way
of method signature, such as some EIPs related to data format and signature schemes.
2. [EIP-165](./eip-165.md) doesn't provide query ability based on caller. This EIP respond `true` or `false` based on caller.


Here is the motivation for this EIP given EIP-165 already exists:

1. Using EIP/ERC numbers improves human readability as well as make it easier to work with named contract such as ENS.

2. Instead of using an EIP-165 identifier, we have seen an increasing interest for using EIP/ERC numbers as the way to identify or specify a EIP/ERCs. For example

- [EIP-5267](./eip-5267.md) specifies `extensions` to be a list of EIP numbers.
- [EIP-600](./eip-600.md), [EIP-601](./eip-601.md) specifies EIP number in `m / purpose' / subpurpose' / EIP' / wallet'`
- [EIP-5568](./eip-5568.md) specifies `The instruction_id of an instruction defined by an EIP MUST be its EIP number unless there are exceptional circumstances (be reasonable)`
- [EIP-6120](./eip-6120.md) specifies `struct Token { uint eip; ..., }` where `uint eip` is an EIP number to identify EIPs.
- `EIP-867`(Stagnant) proposes to create `erpId: A string identifier for this ERP (likely the associated EIP number, e.g. “EIP-1234”).`

3. Having a ERC/EIP number detection interface reduces the need for a lookup table in smart contract to
convert a function method or whole interface in any EIP/ERC in the bytes4 EIP-165 identifier into its respective EIP number and massively simplify the way to specify EIP for behavior expansion.

4. We also recognize a smart contract might have different behavior given different caller. Most notable use case is that a common practice when using Transparent Upgradable Pattern is to give Admin and Non-Admin caller different treatment when calling a Proxy.

## Specification

In the following description we use EIP and ERC interexchangabily. This was because while most of the time the description applies to ERC category of the Standards Track of EIP, the ERC number space is a subspace of EIP number space and we might sometimes encounter EIPs that aren't recognized as ERCs but has behavior that's worthy of queried.

1. Any compliant smart contract MUST implement the following interface

```solidity
interface IERC5269 {
  event OnSupportEIP(
      bool state, // `true` means start supporting an EIP or some EIP behavior. `false` means stops supporting a EIP or some EIP behavior.
      address indexed caller, // when emitted with `address(0x0)` means all callers.
      uint256 indexed majorEIPIdentifier,
      bytes32 indexed minorEIPIdentifier, // 0 means the entire EIP
      bytes calldata extraData
  );

  /// @dev The core method of EIP/ERC Interface Detection
  /// @param caller, a `address` value of the address of a caller being queried whether the given EIP is supported.
  /// @param majorEIPIdentifier, a `uint256` value and SHOULD BE the EIP number being queried. Unless superseded by future EIP, such EIP number SHOULD BE less or equal to (0, 2^32-1]. For a function call to `supportEIP`, any value outside of this range is deemed unspecified and open to implementation's choice or for future EIPs to specify.
  /// @param minorEIPIdentifier, a `bytes32` value reserved for authors of individual EIP to specify. For example the author of [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) MAY specify `keccak256("ERC721Metadata")` or `keccak256("ERC721Metadata.tokenURI")` as `minorEIPIdentifier` to be quired for support. Author could also use this minorEIPIdentifier to specify different versions, such as EIP-712 has its V1-V4 with different behavior.
  /// @param extraData, a `bytes` for [EIP-5750](./eip-5750.md) for future extensions.
  /// @returns magicWorld a bytes32 and SHOULD BE `bytes32 MAGIC_WORD = keccak256("EIP-5679")` if the contract supports an EIP and that behavior.
  function supportEIP(
    address caller,
    uint256 majorEIPIdentifier,
    bytes32 minorEIPIdentifier,
    bytes calldata extraData)
  external view returns (bytes32 magicWord);
}
```

In addition to the behavior specified in the comments of `IERC5269`:


1. Any `minorEIPIdentifier=0` is reserved to be referring to the main behavior of the EIP being queried.
2. Authors of compliant EIP is RECOMMENDED to declare a list of `minorEIPIdentifier` for their optional interfaces, behaviors and value range for future extension.

3. Any compliant contract that is an `IERC5629` MUST return `MAGIC_WORD` for the call of `supportEIP((any caller), 5269, 0)`.
4. Any compliant contract SHOULD emit a `OnSupportEIP(true, address(0), 5269, 0, [])`
5. Any compliant contract MAY declare for easy discovery any EIP main behavior or sub-behaviors by emitting event of `OnSupportEIP` with relevant values.

## Rationale

1. When data type `uint256 majorEIPIdentifier`, there are other alternative options such as (1) use a hashed version of EIP number, or (2) use raw number, (3) use EIP-165 identifier. The pros for (1) is it automatically supports any evolvement of future EIP numbering/naming convention. But the cons is it's not backward readable: seeing a `hash(EIP-number)` one usually can't easily guess what EIP number is. We choose the (2) in the rationale laid out in motivation.
2. We have a `bytes32 minorEIPIdentifier`, alternatively it could be (1) a number, forcing all EIP author to define its numbering for subbehaviors so we go with a `bytes32` and asking EIP author to use a hash for a string name for their subbehaviors which they are already doing by coming up with interface name or method name in their specification.

3. Alternatively it's possible we add extra data as return value or an array of all EIP being supported but we are unsure how much value this complexity brings.

4. Compared to [EIP-165](./eip-165.md), we also add an addition input of `address caller`, given the increasing popularity of proxy patterns such as those enabled by [EIP-1967](./eip-1967.md). One may ask: why not simply use `msg.sender`? This is because
we want to allow query them without transaction or a proxy contract to query if whether interface ERC-`number` will be available to
that particular sender.

1. We reserve the input `majorEIPIdentifier` greater than or equals 2^32 in case we need to support other collection of standards which are not ERC/EIP.

## Security Considerations

Similar to [EIP-165](./eip-165.md) callers of the interface MUST assume the smart contract
declaring they support such EIP interfaces doesn't necessarily correctly support them.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
