---
eip: 2225
title: Methods to Merge Ethereum Blockchains Together
author: Wei Tang (@sorpaas)
discussions-to: https://github.com/sorpaas/EIPs/issues/8
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2019-08-02
requires: 155, 1702
---

This EIP defines methods that can be adopted to merge two
Ethereum-like blockchains together.

Note that this EIP is purely an exploration of technical
possibilities, and it does not mean the author endorse merging
Ethereum and Ethereum Classic, or any other two blockchains together.

## Simple Summary

We define methods to merge multiple blockchains together, in a fully
backward compatible way.

## Abstract

This defines how Ethereum merging can happen, with backward
compatibility in mind. This is done by utilizing account versioning
together with transaction replay protection. We also define three
additional opcodes to allow merged chains to work accross states.

## Motivation

There are many reasons why we may want to merge multiple Ethereum
(eth1.x) blockchains together. For example, there may have been chain
splits of a blockchain, where later the community issues are resolved,
and we want to avoid a permanent split due to a temporary issue. It
may also be two completely distinct blockchains that want to merge in
order to share proof of work, or to improve inter-chain communication.

## Specification

The merge process happens at fork block, where we have a **merger**
chain and a **mergee** chain. At fork height, a miner should mine both
a merger chain's block, and a mergee chain's block. For those two
blocks:

* Both of them should have no transactions.
* Merger chain's fork height block and mergee chain's fork height
  block should have its state root processed as normal.
* Merger chain's fork height block should set its extra data field to
  mergee chain's fork height block's state root. The same for mergee
  chain's fork height block.
* After mergee chain's fork height block, its proof of work should be
  abandoned. That is, updated miners should not continue to mine
  mergee chain any more.
  
### State Root
  
For the block after merger chain's fork height block, the state root
meaning is changed to be hash of concating merger chain's original
state root, and mergee chain's original state root.

### Block Rewards

Use merger chain's original block rewards. And mine coinbase always to
the merger chain's side of the state.

### Transactions and Account Versioning

After merge, transactions with both chain ids are considered valid on
the merger chain. We define two account versions, one with merger
chain's original EVM config, and one with mergee chain's original EVM
config. Accessing accounts originally from either chain should use
EIP-1702's account versioning rules. We define how accounts are
referred on the merged blockchain below:

* For end user interface, prefix `0x01` for accounts on the merger
  chain, and prefix `0x02` for accounts on the mergee chain.
* The transaction format is unchanged with addresses using original
  format. We distingish whether a transaction operates on merger chain
  or mergee chain by its chain id. None replay protected transactions
  must be disabled prior to merging.
* All original opcodes `CALL*`, `CREATE*` are unchanged, where it only
  accesses accounts on the same originating chain.
  
### Cross the Merger and Mergee Chain Boundary

Define factor `P // Q`, which determines how coins are exchanged on
merger chain and mergee chain. Define three new opcodes `MCALL`,
`MCREATE` and `MCREATE2`. They function the same as `CREATE`, `CALL`
and `CREATE2` with the same gas cost, except that it calls accounts on
the other side of the state. Values `V` to be exchanged are computed as
`V * P // Q` from merger side of state to mergee side of state, and
`V * Q // P` from mergee side of state to merger side of state.

## Rationale

This EIP accomplishes the chain merge by concating two blockchain's
state root. In clients, this can be represented as a simple depth one
binary merkle tree where root's left is the merger state, and root's
right is the mergee state. We use account versioning and transaction
replay protection to make it backward compatible for full nodes,
without changing any internal address representation or transaction
representation. We then define additional opcodes to make two sides
communicatable.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP is fully backward compatible for EVM and account states. It
is not backward compatible for light client state proof verification,
because an additional binary merkle tree is added.

## Test Cases

To be added.

## Implementation

To be added.

## Copyright

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).
