---
eip: 2633
title: Formal Proposal for Upgradable Governance
author: Edson Ayllon (@edsonayllon)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-2633-formal-proposal-for-upgradable-governance/4264
status: Draft
type: Meta
created: 2020-05-06
---

## Simple Summary

A formal proposal to set a precedent that Ethereum's governance structure can be changed and improved over time. 

## Motivation

In a survey done collecting feedback from EIP Editors, EIP Authors, and Core Developers, a need was signaled for a formal decision-making process for network upgrade EIP inclusion. While a formal decision-making process can be created, a proper governance solution may take years of research and funding for that research. This proposal is to allow to begin to create a formal decision-making process, while not committing to that formal decision-making process indefinitely, and encourage more improvements to decision making to be pursued and possibly funded.

## Specification

This proposal is to set a precedent for an upgradable governance system for Ethereum. The concept is that Ethereum's governance is not fixed, and can be improved on either regularly or as the need arises. Here, governance is defined as decision making. Currently, this would apply to network upgrade coordination (hard-forks), and not the EIP drafting process itself. 

Upgrade for Ethereum's decision making process can initiate by timing, or as needed. 

If by timing, an upgrade process can be initiated if one has not been iniated for a period of 4 years. 

If by an as needed basis, an upgrade process can be initiated when deemed needed. Here "needed" is defined as requested by Ethereum stakeholders in response to a recently acknowledged issue. 

Issues can include, but are not limited to, chainsplits, controversial EIPs, and security threats.

Ethereum stakeholders include, but are not limited to, a group of Ethereum users, developers, infrastructure maintainers, or business leaders.

The method for upgrading the decision-making can be decided on at the time of the upgrade process, but may include:
- Creating a working group to lead the upgrade process
- Gathering stakeholder feedback
- Reviewing the current process for existing problems
- Rethinking existing values
- Iterating and reducing

## Rationale

How an upgrade process is initiated is kept out of the scope of this EIP, as what can trigger the upgrade process itself can be improved over time. If a formal upgrade initiation process is specified, it may be specified as an EIP which may also be superseded over time. 

The process of how improvements are made is also unspecified, as that process can also be improved over time, and maybe different for the needs of each governance upgrade. 

## Backwards Compatibility

Currently, Ethereum's governance is done off-chain. No compatibility issues.

## Test Cases

No test cases.

## Implementation

No implementation yet. 

## Security Considerations

If changes to governance are poorly made, there would be large security concerns in terms of a single party swaying decisions. 

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).