---
eip: 5252
title: Account-bound Finance
description: A smart contract design pattern in decentralized finance to remove insolvency and arbitrary loss of funds using blockchain technology only. Extension of EIP-5114
author: Hyungsuk Kang (@hskang9)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
status: Draft
requires: 721, 1155, 5114
created: 2022-06-29
---

## Abstract
This EIP proposes a form of smart contract design pattern and a new type of account abstraction on how one's finance should be managed in web3.0, ensuring transparency of managing investments and protection with self-sovereignty even from its financial operators.

This EIP also extends account-bound token from [EIP-5114](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5114), but the difference is that it can be transferred to other accounts for mobility between managing multiple wallets.

## Motivation

Finance in the crypto ecosystem is facing a huge trust issue. Smart contracts are often proxies, with the actual logic of the contract hidden away in a separate logic contract. Many projects include a multi-signature "wallet" with unnecessarily-powerful permissions. And it is not possible to independently verify that stablecoins have enough real-world assets to continue maintaining their peg, creating a large loss of funds (such as happened in the official bankruptcy announcement of Celsius and UST de-pegging and anchor protocol failure). One should not trust exchanges or other third parties with one's own investments.

The pattern empowers more self-sovereignty and gives more credentials(obviously with an Account-bound token) than locking financial data in the operating team's contract.

Segregation between investor's fund and operation fee is clearly specified in the smart contract, so investors can ensure safety from arbitrary loss of funds by the operating team's control.

## Specification

The pattern consists of 5 components, manager, factory, finance, account-bound token, and extension.

### Diagram

TBD

**`Manager`**: **`Manager`** contract acts as an entry point to interact with the investor. The contract also stores parameters for **`Finance`** contract.

**`Factory`**: **`Factory`** contract manages contract bytecode to create for managing investor's fund and [clones](https://soliditydeveloper.com/clonefactory/) **`Finance`** contract on **`Manager`** contract's approval. It also mints account-bound tokens to interact with the `Finance` contract.

**`Finance`**: **`Finance`** contract specifies all rules on managing an investor's fund. The contract is only accessible with an account that has an Account-bound token. When an investor deposits a fund to **`Manager`** contract, the contract sends the fund to **`Finance`** contract accont after separating fees for operation. 

**`Account-bound token`**: **`Account-bound token`** contract in this EIP can bring the **`Finance`** contract's data and add metadata. For example, if there is a money market lending **`Finance`** contract, its **`Account-bound token`** can show how much balance is in agreement using SVG.

**`Extension`**: **`Extension`** contract is another contract that can utilize locked funds in **`Finance`** contract. The contract can access with **`Finance`** contract on operator's approval managed in **`Manager`** contract.

## Reference Implementation

Reference implementation is a CDP-lending stablecoin project [here](https://github.com/digitalnativeinc/standard-evm/tree/master/contracts/vaults/meter).

## Backwards Compatibility
This EIP does not change the consensus layer. It impose changes on the transfer option for account-bound tokens, but a developer can adjust this to enable it or not. So there are no backward compatibility issues.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
