---
eip: 5007
title: TimeNFT, EIP-721 Time Extension
description: Add start time and end time to EIP-721 tokens.
author: Anders (@0xanders), Lance (@LanceSnow), Shrug <shrug@emojidao.org>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip5007-erc721-time-extension/8924
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-04-13
requires: 165, 721
---

## Abstract

This standard is an extension of [EIP-721](./eip-721.md). It proposes some additional functions (`startTime`, `endTime`) to help with on-chain time management.

## Motivation

Some NFTs have a defined usage period and cannot be used outside of that period. With traditional NFTs that do not include time information, if you want to mark a token as invalid or enable it at a specific time, you need to actively submit a transaction—a process both cumbersome and expensive.

Some existing NFTs contain time functions, but their interfaces are not consistent, so it is difficult to develop third-party platforms for them.

By introducing these functions (`startTime`, `endTime`), it is possible to enable and disable NFT automatically on chain.

## Specification

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY" and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

```solidity
interface IERC5007 /* is IERC721 */ {
    /// @notice Get the start time of the NFT
    /// @dev Throws if `tokenId` is not valid NFT
    /// @param tokenId  The tokenId of the NFT
    /// @return The start time of the NFT
    function startTime(uint256 tokenId) external view returns (uint64);
    
    /// @notice Get the end time of the NFT
    /// @dev Throws if `tokenId` is not valid NFT
    /// @param tokenId  The tokenId of the NFT
    /// @return The end time of the NFT
    function endTime(uint256 tokenId) external view returns (uint64);

}
```

The `supportsInterface` method MUST return `true` when called with `0x7a0cdf92`.

## Rationale

### Time Data Type

The max value of `uint64` is 18446744073709551615,  timestamp 18446744073709551615 is about year 584942419325. `uint256` is too big for some software such as MySQL, Elastic Search, and `uint64` is natively supported on mainstream programming languages.

## Backwards Compatibility

As mentioned in the specifications section, this standard can be fully EIP-721 compatible by adding an extension function set.

## Test Cases

Test cases are included in [test.js](../assets/eip-5007/test/test.js). 

See [README.md](../assets/eip-5007/README.md) for how to run the test cases.
 
## Reference Implementation
See [`ERC5007.sol`](../assets/eip-5007/contracts/ERC5007.sol).

## Security Considerations

No security issues found.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
