---
eip: 2139
title: Account Versioning Extension for CREATE and CREATE2
author: Wei Tang (@sorpaas)
discussions-to: https://github.com/sorpaas/EIPs/issues/2
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2019-06-24
requires: 1702
---

## Simple Summary

Specification for an extension of EIP-1702 to allow an EVM contract to
create multiple versions.

## Abstract

This EIP defines an extension to the base layer of account versioning
(EIP-1702) to allow an EVM contract to create sub-contracts of
multiple versions. Although this is not necessary at this moment, it
will be a nice-to-have add-on.

## Motivation

The base account versioning layer only allows contracts of the same
version to be deployed through `CREATE` and `CREATE2`. In this
section, we provide an extension to allow different versions of
contracts to be deployed via them, by providing two new opcodes,
`VCREATE` and `VCREATE2`.

## Specification

Define two new opcodes `VCREATE` and `VCREATE2` at `0xf6` and `0xf7`
respectively. `VCREATE` takes 4 stack arguments (version, value, input
offset, input size), and `VCREATE2` takes 5 stack arguments (version,
endowment, memory_start, memory_length, salt). Note that except the
stack item `version`, other arguments are the same as `CREATE` and
`CREATE2`.

The two new opcodes behave identically to `CREATE` and `CREATE2`,
except that it deploys contracts with version specified by stack item
`version`.

The network at all times maintains a constant list within the client
of all deployable versions (which can be different from supported
versions). Upon `VCREATE` and `VCREATE2`, if the specified `version`
is not on the list of deployable versions, return out-of-gas.

## Rationale

By providing two additional opcodes `VCREATE` and `VCREATE2`, contract
developers can deploy new contracts that take advantage of them to
create new sub-contracts of multiple versions. This may be useful for
situations like upgradable contracts (while it currently still can be
done via proxy contacts using only base layer account versioning).

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP introduces two new opcodes for EVM runtime. Based on current
assumed invariants, it should not have any noticeable backward
compatibility issues.

## Test Cases

Not yet provided.

## Implementation

Not yet implemented.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
