---
eip: 1468
title: A Standard for Tokenized Debt
author: Aaron Diamond-Reivich <aarondia@wharton.upenn.edu>, Gabriel Barros <gbbabarros@gmail.com>, Griffin Anderson <andergri1@gmail.com>, Brett Shear <Brett@terminal.co>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2018-10-03
---

## Simple Summary
The Ethereum community needs a standard for representing debt on the blockchain. The lack of a standard will lead to the creation of siloed pools of debt that are not interoperable. The adoption of this standard will allow for the creation of valuable applications and protocols to help individuals and organizations manage their debt.

## Abstract
From complex transactions like mortgages to simple transactions like purchasing coffee from Starbucks, there is a period of time when one party has yet to fulfill his/her side of the agreement; that party is in debt. The creation of debt is a method to ensure accountability for these incomplete business transactions.

The Ethereum developer community has adopted the ERC20 and ERC721 token standards as a means of representing assets on the Ethereum blockchain. These common standards allow exchanges, wallets, and protocols to facilitate the transfer and custody of these assets. The common interface to enable the transfer of ownership of these digital assets is powerful. However, the inclusion of a few optional pieces of data has proven useful as well, namely, token name, symbol, and the number of decimals. Incorporating this extra information into the standard makes the aforementioned tools even more powerful.

Similar to how additional standards have been built on top of the ERC20 token standard, we are proposing an additional standard on top of the ERC721 token standard. Our Debt Standard defines a common interface that is to be implemented by all ERC721 token smart contracts created to represent debt.

By providing this common debt standard, individuals and applications will be able to gain insight into the debt that each token represents in a systematic way - similar to how applications know how to transfer ownership of an ERC20 token. This will allow for the creation of financial management tools that can be used to manage all forms of debt across the Ethereum blockchain.

## Motivation
The existing ERC 721 token standard is inadequate for representing debt on the blockchain because, although it does provide a standard for transferring ownership of unique tokens, the standard does not include basic functionality that is common across all debts. Importantly, the ERC 721 token standard does not have a standard for associating a value of debt with each token, nor does it have the necessary functions to gain insight into the what the token represents. Because all forms of debt have a value attached to it, it is beneficial to the Ethereum community to agree on a set of basic functions to interact with the value that each debt is worth.

## Specification

### Interface

#### functions

##### fulfill

This function should retrieve information about the debt and try to fulfill the transfer of payments in order to fulfill the debt. It must accommodate the fulfillment by calling the transferFrom method of a ERC20 token or if msg.value is positive, fulfill the payment with Ether.  

* @param debtID - is a unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space

```solidity
function fulfill(uint256 debtID) public payable;
```

##### withdraw

This function should transfer the payment of a specific debtID to the ownerOf(debtID)

* @param debtID - is an unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space

```solidity
function withdraw(uint debt) public;
```


##### status

This function should return the status of a debt based on its time parameters. If the activation date has passed, it should return DebtStatus Materialized. If due date for fulfillment has passed, it should return DebtStatus Defaulted.

* @param debtID - is a unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space

```solidity
function status(uint256 debtID) public view returns (DebtStatus _status);
```

##### info

This function should return the basic static terms of a debt

* @param debtID - is an unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space

```solidity
function info(uint256 debtID) public view returns
(address debtor, address creditor, uint256 amount, address token, uint createdAt, uint validAt, uint defaultedAt);
```

##### calculateFulfillment

This function should calculate all specific terms inherent to the debt and return the exact amount one must pay in order to fulfill the debt at the specified time.

* @param debtID - is an unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space
* @param fulfillmentTime - the period number to check the fulfillment of

```solidity
function calculateFulfillment(uint256 debtID, uint256 fulfillmentTime) public view returns (uint256 amount);
```

##### changeDebtor
This function changes the debtor of a debt to msg.sender.  It must have the approval of the owner of the debt (the recipient of the payment) and the new debtor.

* @param debtID - is an unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space
* @param newDebtor - the address to make the debtor of all new debt
* @param nonceNewDebtor - a unique uint for this transaction; used to prevent replay attacks
* @param nonceOwner - a unique uint for this transaction; used to prevent replay attacks
* @param {vND,rND,sND} - ECDSA signature used to verify approval of new debtor
* @param {vO,rO,sO} - ECDSA signature used to verify approval of the owner of the debt


```solidity
function changeDebtor(
uint256 debtID,
address newDebtor,
uint nonceDebtor,
uint nonceOwner,
uint8 vND,
bytes32 rND,
bytes32 sND,
uint8 vO,
bytes32 rO,
bytes32 sO
)
public
returns (bool success);
```

##### changeDebtContractOwner

This function changes the owner of the debt contract to newOwner. It can only be called by the current owner. All future created debt for the debt contract should default to newOwner as the receiver of the payment

* @param debtID - is a unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space
* @param newOwner - the address to make the receiver of all new debt

```solidity
function changeDebtContractOwner (uint256 debtID, address newOwner) public;
```

#### events

##### Debt Created
```solidity
event DebtCreated(uint indexed subscriptionID, uint indexed debtID, uint referencePeriod);
```

##### Debt Fulfilled
```solidity
event DebtFulfilled(uint indexed subscriptionID, uint indexed debtID);
```

#### State

##### DebtStatus

This user-defined type is used to represent the state of a specific debt.

Approved - An agreement has been made that will result in the debt creation
Materialized - The creditor has upheld his end of the agreement and now the debtor is liable to fulfill his end
Defaulted - The debtor did not uphold his end of the agreement in the agreed upon time
Fulfilled - The debtor fulfilled his terms of the agreement

```solidity
enum DebtStatus { Approved, Materialized, Defaulted, Fulfilled }
```

The above interface should be implemented by all tokens that represent debt of any sort. Additionally, for secured debt and interest-bearing debt, we propose the following supplemental interfaces.

### Secured Debt
The Secured Standard is used in addition to the debt standard to represent collateralized debt.

#### Functions
##### depositCollateral

This function should enable the deposit of collateral goods for this debt. If @param token is set to a valid address, it should attempt to call the transferFrom method of the token address and send @param amount of the tokens from the msg.sender to this smart contract. If msg.value is positive, it should mark msg.value as collateral for this specific debt. It should only allow collateral to be paid in one form of currency for each debt. (Accepted: one ERC20 token or Ether. Not Accepted: Two different types of ERC20 tokens, ERC20 token and Ether).

* @param debtID - is a unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space
* @param token - the address of the token used as collateral
* @param amount - the amount of the token to be collateralized

```solidity
function depositCollateral(uint debtID, address token, uint amount) public payable;
```

##### claimCollateral

If this method is called by the debtor, it should check if the debt has been fulfilled. If the debt is fulfilled, allow the msg.sender to withdraw the collateral. If this method is not called by the debtor, it should check if the msg.sender is the owner of the debt and transfer the collateral only if debtor defaulted.

```solidity
function claimCollateral() public;
```

#### Events

##### CollateralDeposited

```solidity
event CollateralDeposited(uint indexed reference);
```

##### CollateralWithdrawn

```solidity
event CollateralWithdrawn(uint indexed reference);
```

##### CollateralClaimed

```solidity
event CollateralClaimed(uint indexed reference);
```

### Interest

The Interest Standard is used in addition to the debt standard to represent interest-bearing debt.

#### Functions

##### principalPaid

This function should return the amount of principal that has already been repaid.

* @param debtID - is a unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space

```solidity
function principalPaid(uint debtID) public returns (uint principal);
```

##### principalRemaining

This function should return the amount of principal left to pay.

* @param debtID - is a unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space

```solidity
function principalRemaining (uint debtID) public returns (uint principal);
```

##### totalInterestPaid

This function should return the amount of interest paid.

* @param debtID - is a unique identifier of a debt inside this contract space.

```solidity
function totalInterestPaid(uint debtID) public returns (uint interest);
```

## Rationale
Each unique debt token is assigned to a unique debt. When that debt is repaid by the borrower, the owner of the token burns his/her debt token in order to receive the payment. This burned token is now an immutable receipt of the fulfilled debt.

Representing the right to claim the payment for a debt as an EIP 721 NFT immediately allows the owner of the token to sell the debt through existing protocols like 0x.

The debt standard smart contract can be implemented to accommodate a wide range of business processes. We have tested it  with subscriptions, mortgages, and loans. Because the standard does not dictate the creation of the debt, the developer has the freedom to use this standard across a multitude of different use cases.

## Backwards Compatibility
Backward Compatible with EIP 721

## Test Cases
WIP

## Implementation
WIP

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
