---
eip: 7266
title: Remove BLAKE2 compression precompile
description: Remove the blake2f (0x09) precompile by changing the precompile behaviour to result in an exceptional abort
author: Pascal Caversaccio (@pcaversaccio)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/discussion-removal-of-ripemd-160-and-blake2f-precompiles/14857
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-07-03
---

## Abstract

This EIP removes the [`blake2f`](./eip-152.md) (`0x09`) precompile by changing the precompile behaviour to result in an exceptional abort.

## Motivation

[EIP-152](./eip-152.md) has never capitalised on a real-world use case. This fact is clearly reflected in the number of times the address `0x09` has been invoked (numbers from the date this EIP was created):

- The most recent call took place on 6 October 2022.
- Since its gone live as part of the Istanbul network upgrade on December 7 2019 (block number 9,069,000), `0x09` has been called only 22,131 times.

One of the reasons why [EIP-152](./eip-152.md) has failed is that the envisioned use cases were not validated before inclusion.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

All `CALL`, `CALLCODE`, `DELEGATECALL`, and `STATICCALL` invocations to the `blake2f` precompile address `0x09` MUST result in an exceptional abort.

## Rationale

The EVM should be optimised for simplicity and future-proofness. The original Yellow Paper states: _these are so-called 'precompiled' contracts, meant as a preliminary piece of architecture that may later become native extensions_. Considering that no use cases have been realised in the last 3.5 years, we can conclude that the precompile `blake2f` (`0x09`) will never transition into a native opcode. In that sense, the precompile `blake2f` (`0x09`) is an obsolete carry-along with no real-world traction and thus should be removed. This removal will simplify the EVM to the extent that it only consists of clear instructions with real-world use cases. Eventually, the precompile `blake2f` (`0x09`) can be safely used as a test run for the phase-out and removal of EVM functions.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP requires a hard fork as it modifies the consensus rules. Note that very few applications are affected by this change and a lead time of 6-12 months can be considered sufficient.

## Security Considerations

There are no known additional security considerations introduced by this change.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
