---
eip: 6988
title: Slashed validator cannot be elected as a block proposer
description: Prevents a slashed validator from being elected as a block proposer
author: Mikhail Kalinin (@mkalinin)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-05-04
---

## Abstract

Introduces a modification to the consensus layer specification which ensures that slashed validator cannot be elected as block proposer.

## Motivation

A block proposed by a slashed validator is rejected by a corresponding validation check in the [`phase0/process_block_header`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/3115d1140b23dd4c9c23fbd9e2428186cf816bde/specs/phase0/beacon-chain.md#block-header) function as defined in the consensus layer specification.

At the same time the definition of the [`phase0/compute_proposer_index`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/3115d1140b23dd4c9c23fbd9e2428186cf816bde/specs/phase0/beacon-chain.md#compute_proposer_index) allows for a slashed validator to be elected as a proposer. This contradiction effectively leads to an empty slot if a block is supposed to be proposed by a slashed validator.

The impact of the proposed fix in the case of a single slashing on Ethereum Mainnet is negligible but it becomes significant in the case of correlated slashings. For instance, a correlated slashing of `1/10th` of a validator set can lead to `1/10th` of missed proposals in a number of epochs after the slashing.

## Specification

The proposed change is specified in [the consensus layer specification](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/82cd2f1f2317f664b7e179acdd898a327e1fe77e/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#modified-compute_proposer_index).

_TODO: move specification to `/_features` and provide a link._

## Rationale

### Modifying `get_beacon_proposer_index`

This function is modified to read a proposer index from a beacon state if a slot of a latest block header is the same as the `state.slot`.

This modification is done to make the function return correct proposer index in the case when the proposer of a given block is being slashed during processing of the block.

## Backwards Compatibility

This fix changes proposer election mechanism in a backwards incompatible way and requires a hard fork to be deployed.

## Test Cases

_TODO: provide a link to the tests written as a part of consensus layer specification._

## Reference Implementation

_TODO: provide a link to consensus layer specification._

## Security Considerations

There are no observed security issues introduced by the proposed change.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
