---
eip: 6046
title: Replace SELFDESTRUCT with DEACTIVATE
description: Change SELFDESTRUCT to not delete storage keys and use a special value in the account nonce to signal deactivation
author: Alex Beregszaszi (@axic), Pandapip1 (@Pandapip1)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/almost-self-destructing-selfdestruct-deactivate/11886
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2022-11-25
requires: 2681, 2929, 3529
---

## Abstract

Change `SELFDESTRUCT` to not delete all storage keys, and to use a special value in the account nonce to signal *deactivated* accounts, whose transactions are forwarded to subsequent deployments. Because the semantics of revival change (storage keys may exists), we also rename the instruction to `DEACTIVATE`.

## Motivation

The `SELFDESTRUCT` instruction currently has a fixed price, but is unbounded in terms of how many storage/account changes it performs (it needs to delete all keys). This has been an outstanding concern for some time.

Furthermore, with *Verkle trees*, accounts will be organised differently: account properties, including storage, will have individual keys. It will not be possible to traverse and find all used keys. This makes `SELFDESTRUCT` very challenging to support in Verkle trees.

## Specification

1. Change the rules introduced by [EIP-2681](./eip-2681.md) such that regular nonce increase is bound by `2^64-2` instead of `2^64-1`. This applies from genesis.

2. The behaviour of `SELFDESTRUCT` is changed such that:

  - `SELFDESTRUCT` does not delete any storage keys
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` transfers the account balance to the target **and** set account balance to `0.`
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` sets the account nonce to `2^64-1`.
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` sets the deactivated account's contract code to the deactivated account's address plus `1`
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` sets the contract code of accounts directly preceding the deactivated account's address whose nonce is `2^64-1` and whose account code is equal to the deactivated account's address to the deactivated account's address plus `1`. `SELFDESTRUCT` costs an additional `5000` gas for each account modified this way (in addition to the normal gas costs associated with accessing an account's data).
  - Note that no refund is given since [EIP-3529](./eip-3529.md).
  - Note that the rules of [EIP-2929](./eip-2929.md) regarding `SELFDESTRUCT` remain unchanged.

3. Modify `CREATE` and `CREATE2` such that while the nonce of the account creation address equals `2^64-1`, the account creation address is set to the contract's code.

4. Modify external transactions, `CALL`, `STATICCALL`, `DELEGATECALL`, `EXTCODEHASH`, `EXTCODECOPY`, `EXTCODESIZE`, and `BALANCE` such that while the referenced account's nonce equals `2^64-1`, the referenced account is set to the contract's code. These instructions will also cost an additional `25` gas each time an account's nonce is checked beyond the first (in addition to the normal gas costs associated with accessing an account's data).

5. Rename the `SELFDESTRUCT` instruction to `DEACTIVATE`, because the semantics of "account revival" are changed.

## Rationale

There have been various proposals of removing `SELFDESTRUCT` and many would just outright remove the deletion capability. This would break certain usage patterns, which the *deactivation* option leaves intact, albeit with minor changes.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP requires a protocol upgrade, since it modifies consensus rules. The further restriction of nonce should not have an effect on accounts, as `2^64-2` is an unfeasibly high limit.

Contracts using the revival pattern will still work, but the code deployed during revival may need to be made aware that storage keys can already exist in the account.

## Security Considerations

The additional gas costs may cause potential DoS attacks if they access an arbitrary contract's data or make frequent contract deactivations. Contract authors must be aware and design contracts accordingly. There may be an effect on existing deployed code performing autonomous destruction and revival.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
