---
eip: 7702
title: Set Code for EOAs
description: Add a new tx type that permanently sets the code for an EOA
author: Vitalik Buterin (@vbuterin), Sam Wilson (@SamWilsn), Ansgar Dietrichs (@adietrichs), lightclient (@lightclient)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-set-eoa-account-code-for-one-transaction/19923
status: Final
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-05-07
requires: 2, 161, 1052, 2718, 2929, 2930, 3541, 3607, 4844
---

## Abstract

Add a new [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) transaction type that allows Externally
Owned Accounts (EOAs) to set the code in their account. This is done by
attaching a list of authorization tuples -- individually formatted as `[chain_id,
address, nonce, y_parity, r, s]` -- to the transaction. For each tuple, a
delegation indicator `(0xef0100 || address)` is written to the authorizing
account's code. All code executing operations must load and execute the code
pointed to by the delegation.

## Motivation

Despite great advances in the smart contract wallet ecosystem, EOAs have held
back broad adoption of UX improvements across applications. This EIP therefore
focuses on adding short-term functionality improvements to EOAs which will allow
UX improvements to permeate through the entire application stack. Three
particular features this EIP is designed around are:

* **Batching**: allowing multiple operations from the same user in one atomic
transaction. One common example is an [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) approval followed by
spending that approval. This is a common workflow in DEXes that requires two
transactions today. Advanced use cases of batching occasionally involve
dependencies: the output of the first operation is part of the input to the
second operation.
* **Sponsorship**: account X pays for a transaction on behalf of account Y.
Account X could be paid in some other ERC-20 for this service, or it could be an
application operator including the transactions of its users for free.
* **Privilege de-escalation**: users can sign sub-keys and give them specific
permissions that are much weaker than global access to the account. For example,
a permission to spend ERC-20 tokens but not ETH, or to spend up to 1% of the
total balance per day, or to interact only with a specific application.

## Specification

### Parameters

|     Parameter            | Value   |
| ------------------------ | ------- |
| `SET_CODE_TX_TYPE`       | `0x04`  |
| `MAGIC`                  | `0x05`  |
| `PER_AUTH_BASE_COST`     | `12500` |
| `PER_EMPTY_ACCOUNT_COST` | `25000` |

### Set code transaction

A new [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) transaction known as the "set code transaction"
is introduced, where the `TransactionType` is `SET_CODE_TX_TYPE` and the
`TransactionPayload` is the RLP serialization of the following:

```
rlp([chain_id, nonce, max_priority_fee_per_gas, max_fee_per_gas, gas_limit,
destination, value, data, access_list, authorization_list, signature_y_parity,
signature_r, signature_s])

authorization_list = [[chain_id, address, nonce, y_parity, r, s], ...]
```

The fields `chain_id`, `nonce`, `max_priority_fee_per_gas`, `max_fee_per_gas`,
`gas_limit`, `destination`, `value`, `data`, and `access_list` of the outer
transaction follow the same semantics as [EIP-4844](./eip-4844.md). *Note, this
implies a null destination is not valid.*

The `signature_y_parity, signature_r, signature_s` elements of this transaction
represent a secp256k1 signature over `keccak256(SET_CODE_TX_TYPE ||
TransactionPayload)`.

The `authorization_list` is a list of tuples that indicate what code the signer
of each tuple desires to execute in the context of their EOA. The transaction is
considered invalid if the length of `authorization_list` is zero.

The transaction is also considered invalid when any field in an authorization
tuple cannot fit within the following bounds:

```python
assert auth.chain_id < 2**256
assert auth.nonce < 2**64
assert len(auth.address) == 20
assert auth.y_parity < 2**8
assert auth.r < 2**256
assert auth.s < 2**256
```

The [EIP-2718](./eip-2718.md) `ReceiptPayload` for this transaction is
`rlp([status, cumulative_transaction_gas_used, logs_bloom, logs])`.

#### Behavior

The authorization list is processed before the execution portion of the
transaction begins, but after the sender's nonce is incremented.

For each `[chain_id, address, nonce, y_parity, r, s]` tuple, perform the
following:

1. Verify the chain ID is 0 or the ID of the current chain.
2. Verify the `nonce` is less than `2**64 - 1`.
3. Let `authority = ecrecover(msg, y_parity, r, s)`.
    * Where `msg = keccak(MAGIC || rlp([chain_id, address, nonce]))`.
    * Verify `s` is less than or equal to `secp256k1n/2`, as specified in
    [EIP-2](./eip-2.md).
4. Add `authority` to `accessed_addresses`, as defined in [EIP-2929](./eip-2929.md).
5. Verify the code of `authority` is empty or already delegated.
6. Verify the nonce of `authority` is equal to `nonce`.
7. Add `PER_EMPTY_ACCOUNT_COST - PER_AUTH_BASE_COST` gas to the global refund
   counter if `authority` is not empty.
8. Set the code of `authority` to be `0xef0100 || address`. This is a delegation
   indicator.
    * If `address` is `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000`, do not write
    the delegation indicator. Clear the account's code by resetting the account's
    code hash to the empty code hash
    `0xc5d2460186f7233c927e7db2dcc703c0e500b653ca82273b7bfad8045d85a470`.
9. Increase the nonce of `authority` by one.

If any step above fails, immediately stop processing the tuple and continue to
the next tuple in the list. When multiple tuples from the same authority are
present, set the code using the address in the last valid occurrence.

Note, if transaction execution results in failure (e.g. any exceptional
condition or code reverting), the processed delegation indicators is *not rolled
back*.

##### Delegation indicator

Delegation indicators use the banned opcode `0xef`, defined in
[EIP-3541](./eip-3541.md), to indicate that the code must be handled differently
than regular code. The delegation forces all code executing operations to follow
the address pointer to obtain the code to execute. For example, `CALL` loads the
code at `address` and executes it in the context of `authority`.

The affected executing operations are:

* `CALL`
* `CALLCODE`
* `DELEGATECALL`
* `STATICCALL`
* any transaction where `destination` points to an address with a delegation
indicator present

For code reading, only `CODESIZE` and `CODECOPY` instructions are affected. They
operate directly on the executing code instead of the delegation. For example,
when executing a delegated account `EXTCODESIZE` returns `23` (the size of
`0xef0100 || address`) whereas `CODESIZE` returns the size of the code residing
at `address`.

*Note, this means during delegated execution `CODESIZE` and `CODECOPY` produce a
different result compared to calling `EXTCODESIZE` and `EXTCODECOPY` on the
authority.*

###### Precompiles

When a precompile address is the target of a delegation, the retrieved code is
considered empty and `CALL`, `CALLCODE`, `STATICCALL`, `DELEGATECALL`
instructions targeting this account will execute empty code, and therefore
succeed with no execution when given enough gas to initiate the call.

###### Loops

In case a delegation indicator points to another delegation, creating a
potential chain or loop of delegations, clients must retrieve only the first
code and then stop following the delegation chain.

#### Gas Costs

The intrinsic cost of the new transaction is inherited from
[EIP-2930](./eip-2930.md), specifically `21000 + 16 * non-zero calldata bytes +
4 * zero calldata bytes + 1900 * access list storage key count + 2400 * access
list address count`. Additionally, add a cost of `PER_EMPTY_ACCOUNT_COST *
authorization list length`.

The transaction sender will pay for all authorization tuples, regardless of
validity or duplication.

If a code executing instruction accesses a cold account during the resolution of
delegated code, add an additional [EIP-2929](eip-2929.md)
`COLD_ACCOUNT_READ_COST` cost of `2600` gas to the normal cost and add the
account to `accessed_addresses`. Otherwise, assess a `WARM_STORAGE_READ_COST`
cost of `100`.

#### Transaction origination

Modify the restriction put in place by [EIP-3607](./eip-3607.md) to allow EOAs
whose code is a valid delegation indicator, i.e. `0xef0100 || address`, to
originate transactions. Accounts with any other code values may not originate
transactions.

Additionally, if a transaction's `destination` has a delegation indicator, add
the target of the delegation to `accessed_addresses`.

## Rationale

Below is the rationale for both general design directions of the EIP, as well as
specific technical choices.

### General design philosophy

#### Persistence of code delegation

The first draft of this proposal had a clever idea to avoid disagreement on
whether in-protocol revocation was needed or not. The idea was to temporarily
set code in the account with the authorization. After the transaction finished,
the code would be completely cleared. This was a new design space for enriching
EOA functionality.

Even this approach was not without its flaws. Fundamentally, there was not much
friction for users including set code authorizations. This meant that some users
and applications would opt to treat the extension as more of a scripting
facility, rather than a full-fledged upgrade to a smart contract wallet. The
outcome of this would be two somewhat competing workstreams for UX improvements:
smart contract wallets and EOA scripts.

Previous proposals had been met with similar criticisms. To counteract this,
persistent delegations were introduced. They create enough friction in
deployment that users will not deploy new, unique ones regularly. This will
hopefully unify the workstreams and minimize fragmentation in UX developments.

#### No initcode

Running initcode is not desirable for many reasons. It creates a new mode of
execution that needs extensive testing, and may be used for purposes not
possible with standard smart contract wallets. It also forces developers to
perform initialization as a standard call to the EOA after delegation. The lack
of atomicity in these operations is another factor that will push users to
complete smart contract wallet solutions, instead of EOA scripts.

Additionally, initcode tends to be propagated inside the transaction calldata.
This means it would need to be included in the authorization tuple and signed
over. The minimum initcode is around 15 bytes -- it would simply copy the
contract code from an external address. The total cost would be `16 * 15 = 240`
calldata cost, plus the [EIP-3860](./eip-3860.md) cost of `2 * 15 = 30`, plus
the runtime costs of around `150`. So nearly `500` additional gas would be spent
preparing the account. Even more likely, 1200+ gas if not copying from an
external account.

#### Creation by template

Initcode or not, there is a question of how users should specify the code they
intend to run in their account. The two main options are to specify the bytecode
directly in the transaction or to specify a pointer to the code. The simplest
pointer would just be the address of code deployed on-chain.

The cost analysis makes the answer clear. The smallest proxy would be around 50
bytes and an address is 20 bytes. The 30 byte difference provides no useful
additional functionality and will be inefficiently replicated billions of times.

Furthermore, specifying code directly would again make it possible for EOAs to
have a new, unique ability to execute arbitrary code specified in the
transaction calldata. It is for these reasons that creation by template is
chosen.

#### Interaction with applications and wallets

While this EIP provides a lot of flexibility to applications and EOAs, there are
incorrect ways of using it. Applications **must not** expect that they can
suggest the user sign an authorization, and therefore it is the duty of the
wallet to not provide an interface to do so.

**There is no safe way to provide this interface**. The code specified by an
authorization has unrestricted access to the account and must always be closely
audited by the wallet. Few users have the level of sophistication to reasonably
verify the code they are delegating to.

It is also not possible to implement a system of permissions at this level to
minimize the risk. If applications require custom wallet functionality, they
must use standardized extension / module systems built on top of the delegated
code that correctly implements permissions.

#### Forward-compatibility with future account abstraction

This EIP is designed to be forward-compatible with endgame account abstraction,
without over-enshrining any fine-grained details of [ERC-4337](./eip-4337.md) or
RIP-7560.

To start, the `address` that users sign could directly point to existing
ERC-4337 wallet code. This essentially requires the "code pathways" that are
used are code pathways that would, in most cases, continue to make sense in a
pure-smart-contract-wallet world. Hence, it avoids the problem of creating two
separate UX workstreams because, to a large extent, they would be the same
ecosystem.

There will be some workflows that require kludges under this solution that would
be better done in some different "more native" under "endgame AA", but this is
relatively a small subset. The EIP does not require adding any opcodes, that
would become dangling and useless in a post-EOA world, and it allows EOAs to
masquerade as contracts to be included in ERC-4337 bundles, in a way that's
compatible with the existing `EntryPoint`.

#### Self-sponsoring: allowing `tx.origin` to set code

Allowing `tx.origin` to set code and execute its own delegated code enables what
is called self-sponsoring. It allows users to take advantage of EIP-7702 without
relying on any third party infrastructure.

However, that means the EIP breaks the invariant that `msg.sender == tx.origin`
only happens in the topmost execution frame of a transaction. This will affect
smart contracts containing `require(msg.sender == tx.origin)` style checks. This
check is used for at least three purposes:

1. Ensuring that `msg.sender` is an EOA (given that `tx.origin` always has to be
   an EOA). This invariant does not depend on the execution layer depth and,
   therefore, is not affected.
2. Protecting against atomic sandwich attacks like flash loans, which rely on
   the ability to modify state before and after the execution of the target
   contract as part of the same atomic transaction. This protection would be broken
   by this EIP. However, relying on `tx.origin` in this way is considered bad
   practice, and can already be circumvented by miners conditionally including
   transactions in a block.
3. Preventing reentrancy.

Examples of (1) and (2) can be found in contracts deployed on Ethereum mainnet,
with (1) being more common (and unaffected by this proposal). On the other hand,
use case (3) is more severely affected by this proposal, but the authors of this
EIP did not find any examples of this form of reentrancy protection, though the
search was non-exhaustive.

This distribution of occurrences—many (1), some (2), and no (3)—is exactly what
the authors of this EIP expect because:

* Determining if `msg.sender` is an EOA without `tx.origin` is difficult, if not
impossible.
* The only execution context which is safe from atomic sandwich attacks is the
topmost context, and `tx.origin == msg.sender` is the only way to detect that
context.
* In contrast, there are many direct and flexible ways of preventing reentrancy
(e.g., using a transient storage variable). Since `msg.sender == tx.origin` is
only true in the topmost context, it would make an obscure tool for preventing
reentrancy, rather than other more common approaches.

There are other approaches to mitigate this restriction which do not break the
invariant:

* Set `tx.origin` to a constant `ENTRY_POINT` address when using the `CALL*`
instruction in the context of an EOA.
* Set `tx.origin` to a special address derived from the sender or signer
addresses.
* Disallow `tx.origin` from setting code. This would make the simple batching
use cases impossible, but could be relaxed in the future.

### Rationale for technical details

#### Cost of delegation

The `PER_AUTH_BASE_COST` is the cost to process the authorization tuple and set
the delegation destination. To compute a fair cost for this operation, the
authors review its impact on the system:

* ferry 101 bytes of calldata = `101 * non-zero cost (16) = 1616`
* recovering the `authority` address = `3000`
* reading the nonce and code of `authority` = `2600`
* storing values in already warm account = `200`
* cost to deploy code = `200 * 23 = 4600`

The impact-based assessment identifies `12016` gas of comparable computation for
the operation. It is rounded up to `12500` to account for miscellaneous costs
associated with shuttling data around the state transition.

#### Clearing delegation indicators

A general design goal in state transition changes is to minimize the number of
special cases an EIP has. In early iterations, this EIP resisted a special case
for clearing an account's delegation indicator.

For most intents and purposes, an account delegated to `0x0` is
indistinguishable from a true EOA. However, one particular unfortunate case is
unavoidable. Even if a user has a zeroed out delegation indicator, most
operations that interact with that account will incur an additional
`COLD_ACCOUNT_READ_COST` upon the first touch caused by attempting to load the
code at `0x0`.

For this reason, the authors have opted to include a special case which allow
users to restore their EOA to its original purity.

#### Lack of instruction prohibition

Consistency is a valuable property in the EVM, both from an implementation
perspective and a user-understanding-perspective. Despite considering bans on
several families of instructions in the context of EOAs, the authors feel there
is not a compelling reason to do so, as it would cause smart contract wallets
and EOA smart contract wallets to proceed down distinct UX workstreams.

The main instruction families where a ban was considered were storage related
and contract creation related. The decision to not ban storage instructions
hinged mostly on their importance to smart contract wallets. Although it's
possible to have an external storage contract that the smart contract wallet
calls into, it is unnecessarily complicated and inefficient. In the future, new
state schemes may allow substantially cheaper access to certain storage slots
within an account. This is something smart contract wallets will want to take
advantage of that a storage contract wouldn't support.

Creation instructions were considered for a ban as well on other similar EIPs,
however because this EIP allows EOAs to spend value intra-transaction, the
concern with bumping the nonce intra-transaction and invalidating pending
transactions is not significant.

#### Protection from malleability cross-chain

One consideration when signing a code pointer is what code that address points
to on another chain. While it is possible to create a deterministic deployment,
i.e. via Nick's method, verifying such a deployment may not always be desirable.
In such situations, the chain ID can be set to reduce the scope of the
authorization. When universal deployment is preferred, simply set chain ID to 0.

An alternative to adding chain ID could be to substitute in the actual code for
the address in the signature. This seems to have the benefit of both minimizing
the on-chain size of auth tuples, by continuing to serialize only the address,
while retaining specificity of the actual code running in the account, by
pulling in the code for the signature. One unfortunate issue of this format,
though, is that it imposes a database lookup to determine the signer of each
auth tuple. This imposition itself seems to create enough complexity in
transaction propagation that it is decided to avoid and simply sign over the
address directly.

#### Delegation of code execution only

Other code retrieving operations like `EXTCODEHASH` do not automatically follow
delegations, they operate on the delegation indicator itself. If instead
delegations were followed, an account would be able to temporarily masquerade as
having a particular codehash, which would break contracts that rely on
codehashes as a definition of possible account behavior. A change of behavior in
a contract is currently only possible if its code explicitly allows it (in
particular via `DELEGATECALL`), and a change of codehash is only possible in the
presence of `SELFDESTRUCT` (which, as of Cancun, only applies in the same
transaction as contract creation), so choosing to follow delegations in
`EXTCODE*` opcodes would have created a new type of account breaking prior
assumptions.

#### Charge maximum cost upfront

While computing the intrinsic gas cost, the transaction is charged the
worst-case cost for each delegation. Later, while processing the authorization
list, a refund is issued if the account already exists in state. This mechanism
is designed to avoid state lookups for each authorization when computing the
intrinsic gas and can quickly determine the validity of the transaction with
only a state lookup on the sender's account.

#### No blobs, no contract creation

Transactions should be thought of as specialized tools and not necessarily a
one-type-does-all solution. EIP-4844 is treated differently at the p2p level due
to burden blobs place on a node's bandwidth. EIP-7702 has different implications
on transaction gossiping and there is no need to complicate those rules
unnecessarily by making it a superset of all possible functionality. The authors
ultimately do not expect there to be much demand for atomic delegation and blob
submission.

Contract creation is another specialized use case that has been grandfathered
into several transaction types. It adds complexity to testing, because it is a
new distinct branch of execution that needs to be tested when any change to the
EVM occurs and verify the change works as expected in that context.

For these reasons, the authors have chosen to keep the scope of the EIP focused
on improving UX.

#### Disallow delegation to precompiles

Precompiles are themselves edge cases, so allowing delegations to precompiles or
not requires some focus in implementation. Considering the fact that precompiles
technically do not have code associated with their accounts, the authors decided
it would be marginally simpler to not execute the precompile logic when a user
delegates to one. This is somewhat unintuitive.

#### Non-empty authorization list required

Set code transactions are required to have at least one authorization to be
considered valid. This is to disincentivize senders from using type 4
transactions as a generic transaction format, because this transaction has
different implications on the transaction pool than, say,
[EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md) transactions.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP breaks a few invariants:

* An account balance can only decrease as a result of a transaction originating
from that account.
  * Once an account has been delegated, any call to the account may also cause
  the balance to decrease.
* An EOA nonce may not increase after transaction execution has begun.
  * Once an account has been delegated, the account may call a create operation
    during execution, causing the nonce to increase.
* `tx.origin == msg.sender` can only be true in the topmost frame of execution.
  * Once an account has been delegated, it can invoke multiple calls per
  transaction.

## Security Considerations

### Implementation of secure delegate contracts

The following is a non-exhaustive list of pitfalls that delegate contracts
*should* be wary of and require a signature over from the account's authority:

* Replay protection (e.g., a nonce) should be implemented by the delegate and
signed over. Without it, a malicious actor can reuse a signature, repeating its
effects.
* `value` -- without it, a malicious sponsor could cause unexpected effects in
the callee.
* `gas` -- without it, a malicious sponsor could cause the callee to run out of
gas and fail, griefing the sponsee.
* `target` / `calldata` -- without them, a malicious actor may call arbitrary
functions in arbitrary contracts.

A poorly implemented delegate can *allow a malicious actor to take near complete
control over a signer's EOA*.

### Front running initialization

Smart contract wallet developers must consider the implications of setting code
in an account without execution. Contracts are normally deployed by executing
initcode to determine the exact code to be placed in the account. This gives
developers the opportunity to initialize storage slots at the same time. The
initial values of the account cannot be replaced by an observer, because they
are either signed over by an EOA in the case of a creation transaction or they
are committed to by computing the contract's address deterministically from the
hash of the initcode.

This EIP does not provide developers the opportunity to run initcode and set
storage slots during delegation. To secure the account from an observer
front-running the initialization of the delegation with an account they control,
smart contract wallet developers must verify the initial calldata to the account
for setup purposes be signed by the EOA's key using ecrecover. This ensures the
account can only be initialized with desirable values.

### Storage management

Changing an account's delegation is a security-critical operation that should
not be done lightly, especially if the newly delegated code is not purposely
designed and tested as an upgrade to the old one.

In particular, in order to ensure a safe migration of an account from one
delegate contract to another, it's important for these contracts to use storage
in a way that avoids accidental collisions among them. For example, using
[ERC-7201](./eip-7201.md) a contract may root its storage layout at a slot
dependent on a unique identifier. To simplify this, smart contract languages may
provide a way of re-rooting the entire storage layout of existing contract
source code.

If all contracts previously delegated to by the account used the approach
described above, a migration should not cause any issues. However, if there is
any doubt, it is recommended to first clear all account storage, an operation
that is not natively offered by the protocol but that a special-purpose delegate
contract can be designed to implement.

### Setting code as `tx.origin`

Allowing the sender of an EIP-7702 to also set code has the possibility to:

* Break atomic sandwich protections which rely on `tx.origin`;
* Break reentrancy guards of the style `require(tx.origin == msg.sender)`.

The authors of this EIP believe the risks of allowing this are acceptable for
the reasons outlined in the Rationale section.

### Sponsored transaction relayers

It is possible for the `authorized` account to cause sponsored transaction
relayers to spend gas without being reimbursed by either invalidating the
authorization (i.e., increasing the account's nonce) or by sweeping the relevant
assets out of the account. Relayers should be designed with these cases in mind,
possibly by requiring a bond to be deposited or by implementing a reputation
system.

### Transaction propagation

Allowing EOAs to behave as smart contracts via the delegation indicator poses
some challenges for transaction propagation. Traditionally, EOAs have only been
able to send value via a transaction. This invariant allows nodes to statically
determine the validity of transactions for that account. In other words, a
single transaction has only been able to invalidate transactions pending from
the sender's account.

With this EIP, it becomes possible to cause transactions from other accounts to
become stale. This is due to the fact that once an EOA has delegated to code,
that code can be called by anyone at any point in a transaction. It becomes
impossible to know if the balance of the account has been swept in a static
manner.

While there are a few mitigations for this, the authors recommend that clients
do not accept more than one pending transaction for any EOA with a non-zero
delegation indicator. This minimizes the number of transactions that can be
invalidated by a single transaction.

An alternative would be to expand the EIP-7702 transaction with a list of
accounts the caller wishes to "hydrate" during the transaction. Those accounts
behave as the delegated code *only* for EIP-7702 transactions which include them
in such a list, thus returning to clients the ability to statically analyze and
reason about pending transactions.

A related issue is that an EOA's nonce may be incremented more than once per
transaction. Because clients already need to be robust in a worse scenario
(described above), it isn't a major concern. However, clients should be aware
this behavior is possible and design their transaction propagation accordingly.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
