---
eip: 868
title: Node Discovery v4 ENR Extension
author: Felix Lange <fjl@ethereum.org>
type: Standards Track
category: Networking
status: Draft
created: 2018-02-02
requires: 8, 778
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/issues/44
---

# Abstract

This EIP defines an extension to Node Discovery Protocol v4 to enable authoritative
resolution of [Ethereum Node Records (ENR)](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-778).

# Motivation

To bridge current and future discovery networks and to aid the implementation of other
relay mechanisms for ENR such as DNS, we need a way to request the most up-to-date version
of a node record. This EIP provides a way to request it using the existing discovery
protocol.

# Specification

Implementations of Node Discovery Protocol v4 should support two new packet types, a
request and reply of the node record. The existing ping and pong packets are extended with
a new field containing the sequence number of the ENR.

### Ping Packet (0x01)

```text
packet-data = [version, from, to, expiration, enr-seq]
```

`enr-seq` is the current sequence number of the sending node's record. All other fields
retain their existing meaning.

### Pong Packet (0x02)

```text
packet-data = [to, ping-hash, expiration, enr-seq]
```

`enr-seq` is the current sequence number of the sending node's record. All other fields
retain their existing meaning.

### ENRRequest Packet (0x05)

```text
packet-data = [ expiration ]
```

When a packet of this type is received, the node should reply with an ENRResponse packet
containing the current version of its record.

To guard against amplification attacks, the sender of ENRRequest should have replied to a
ping packet recently (just like for FindNode). The `expiration` field, a UNIX timestamp,
should be handled as for all other existing packets i.e. no reply should be sent if it
refers to a time in the past.

### ENRResponse Packet (0x06)

```text
packet-data = [ request-hash, ENR ]
```

This packet is the response to ENRRequest.

- `request-hash` is the hash of the entire ENRRequest packet being replied to.
- `ENR` is the node record.

The recipient of the packet should verify that the node record is signed by node who sent
ENRResponse.

## Resolving Records

To resolve the current record of a node public key, perform a recursive Kademlia lookup
using the FindNode, Neighbors packets. When the node is found, send ENRRequest to it and
return the record from the response.

# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
