---
eip: 7692
title: EVM Object Format (EOFv1) Meta
description: List of EIPs belonging to the EOFv1 proposal
author: Alex Beregszaszi (@axic), Paweł Bylica (@chfast), Andrei Maiboroda (@gumb0), Piotr Dobaczewski (@pdobacz), Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7692-evm-object-format-eof-meta/19686
status: Review
type: Meta
created: 2024-04-17
requires: 663, 3540, 3670, 4200, 4750, 5450, 6206, 7480, 7620, 7873
---

## Abstract

This Meta EIP lists the EIPs which belong to the EVM Object Format (EOF) proposal, in its first version (EOFv1), also known as the "Mega EOF".

## Specification

### EIPs Included

- [EIP-3540](./eip-3540.md): EOF - EVM Object Format v1
- [EIP-3670](./eip-3670.md): EOF - Code Validation
- [EIP-4200](./eip-4200.md): EOF - Static relative jumps
- [EIP-4750](./eip-4750.md): EOF - Functions
- [EIP-5450](./eip-5450.md): EOF - Stack Validation
- [EIP-6206](./eip-6206.md): EOF - JUMPF and non-returning functions
- [EIP-7480](./eip-7480.md): EOF - Data section access instructions
- [EIP-663](./eip-663.md): SWAPN, DUPN and EXCHANGE instructions
- [EIP-7620](./eip-7620.md): EOF Contract Creation
- [EIP-7873](./eip-7873.md): EOF - TXCREATE and InitcodeTransaction type

### EIPs Considered for Inclusion 

This EIP is still considered for inclusion in [EIP-7607](./eip-7607) Hardfork Meta - Fusaka, and would be considered as part of EOFv1 if scheduled for inclusion.

- [EIP-7834](./eip-7834.md): Separate Metadata Section for EOF

This EIP is still considered for inclusion in Fusaka, but would not be considered part of EOFv1 if adopted.
- [EIP-5920](./eip-5920.md): PAY opcode

This section will be removed when the specification goes into Final Review and is present for informational purposes.

### EIPs Removed from Prior Versions (Remove Before Final State)

Prior revisions of EOF included these EIPS. None are part of EOFv1. These EIPs may be added to a future backwards compatible version of EOF, but they are not considered for any hardfork at the moment.

- [EIP-7069](./eip-7069.md): Revamped CALL instructions
- [EIP-7698](./eip-7698.md): EOF - Creation transaction
- [EIP-7761](./eip-7761.md): EXTCODETYPE instruction
- [EIP-7880](./eip-7880.md): EOF - EXTCODEADDRESS instruction

This section will be removed when the specification goes into Final Review and is present for informational purposes.

## Rationale

Refer to the individual EIPs.

## Security Considerations

Discussed in the individual EIPs.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
