---
eip: 5252
title: Account-bound Finance
description: A smart contract design pattern in decentralized finance to remove insolvency and arbitrary loss of funds using blockchain technology only. Extension of EIP-4973
author: Hyungsuk Kang (@hskang9)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
status: Draft
requires: 721, 1155, 4973
created: 2022-06-29
---

## Abstract
This EIP proposes a form of smart contract design pattern and a new type account abstraction on how one's finance should be managed in web3.0, ensuring transparency of managing investments and protection with self-sovereignty even from its financial operators.

This EIP also extends account-bound token from [EIP-4973](./eip-4973), but the difference is that it can be transferred to other account for mobility between managing device.

## Motivation

Finance in crypto ecosystem are facing huge trust issue. Smart contracts can be now a proxy of multisig for operating teams, and Insolvencies do exist in that there is no trace of funds written in blockchain. That can create arbitrary loss of funds as happened in official bankruptcy announcement of Celsius and UST depegging and anchor protocol failure. Smart contract should be used for peer-to-peer only, with immutable rules etched so that only one who has the private key has full access of managing his investment as bitcoin promises. 

Illustration TBD

The pattern empowers more self-sovereignty in users and gives more credentials (obviously with Account-bound tokens) than locking financial data in the operating team's contract.

Illustration TBD

The separation between an investor's fund and the operating fee is clearly specified in the smart contract, so investors can ensure safety from arbitrary loss of funds through the operating team's control.

## Specification

The pattern consists of 5 components, manager, factory, finance, account-bound token, extension.

### Diagram

TBD

**`Manager`**: **`Manager`** contract acts as an entry point to interact with the investor. The contract also stores parameters for **`Finance`** contract.

**`Factory`**: **`Factory`** contract manages contract bytecode to create for managing investor's fund and [clones](https://soliditydeveloper.com/clonefactory/) **`Finance`** contract on **`Manager`** contract's approval. It also mints account-bound token to interact with `Finance` contract.

**`Finance`**: **`Finance`** contract specifies all rules on managing investor's fund. The contract is only accessible with account who has Account-bound token. When an investor deposits fund to **`Manager`** contract, the contract sends the fund to **`Finance`** contract after segregation of fees for operation. 

**`Account-bound token`**: **`Account-bound token`** contract in this EIP can bring **`Finance`** contract's data and add in its metadata. For example, if there is a money market lending **`Finance`** contract, its **`Account-bound token`** can show how much balance is in the contract using SVG.

**`Extension`**: **`Extension`** contract is another contract that can utilize locked funds in **`Finance`** contract. The contract is able to access with **`Finance`** contract on operator's approval managed in **`Manager`** contract.

## Reference Implementation

Reference implementation is a CDP-lending stablecoin project [here](https://github.com/digitalnativeinc/standard-evm/tree/master/contracts/vaults/meter).

TBD on specification on each component

## Backwards Compatibility
This EIP does not change he consensus layer. It impose changes on transfer option for account-bound tokens, but this can be adjusted by developer to enable it or not. so there are no backwards compatibility issues.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
