---
eip: 3788
title: Logographic NFT Standard
description: Unicode-based Logographic Representations
author: Simon Tian (@simontianx)
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/3782
status: Draft
type: Standards Track,
category: ERC
created: 2021-10-01
replaces (*optional): <EIP number(s)>
---

## Abstract
A vanilla non-fungible token standard proposed by [EIP-3754](./eip-3754.md)
together with the established **unicode** system can create an on-chain language
system particularly valuable for representing language characters that are
logographs. Examples include _hanzi_ in Mandarin, _kanji_ in Japanese, _hanja_
in Korean, and etc. On-chain chatting, blogs, micro-blogs systems can be built
for communities using such languages.

## Motivation
A logograph is a written character that represents a word or morpheme, whereas a
unicode is an information technology standard for the consistent encoding,
representation, and handling of texts. A vanilla NFT by [EIP-3754](./eip-3754.md)
by specifying tokenIds as certain unicodes can open up a new language system for
on-chain representation of logograpic languages.

This is particularly valuable for logographs because a rich amount of meanings
can be transmitted in just a few characters or tokens. However, this is not
providing enough additional utility for non-logographic languages such as English.
Emojis can be included as well.

A motivating example is instead of sending the two Chinese letters of the Great Wall
`长城`, two EIP-3754 tokens with ID`#38271` and ID`#22478` that are the
corresponding decimal unicodes of the two characters can be sent. The
receiving end decodes the IDs and retrieves the original logographic characters.
A key point to pay attention to is the ordering information matters since the
tuples `(#38271, #22478)` and `(#22478, #38271)` mean `长城` and `城长`,
respectively, and both are legitimate words in the Chinese language.

Besides, in the eastern Asian culture, characters are sometimes considered or
practically used as gifts in holidays such as Spring Feastival, etc.
`(#24685, #21916, #21457, #36001)` can be used literally as a gift to express the
best wishes for financial prosperity.

What is even more interesting is in that culture, people consider ancient teachings
as treasures which are usually written in an obscure way that a handle of characters
can be unfolded with a rich amount of meanings. Modern people now get a chance to
speak to the future generations by sending tokens.

## Specification
```
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

/**
    @title EIP-3788 Logographic NFT Standard
    @dev See https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3788
 */
interface ERC3788 /* is ERC165 */ {
    event Transfer(address indexed _operator, address indexed _from, address indexed _to, uint256 _id, uint256 _value);

    event TransferBatch(address indexed _operator, address indexed _from, address indexed _to, uint256[] _ids, uint256[] _values);

    event ApprovalForAll(address indexed _owner, address indexed _operator, bool _approved);

    function safeTransferFrom(address _from, address _to, uint256 _id, uint256 _value, bytes calldata _data) external;

    function safeBatchTransferFrom(address _from, address _to, uint256[] calldata _ids, uint256[] calldata _values, bytes calldata _data) external;

    function balanceOf(address _owner, uint256 _id) external view returns (uint256);

    function balanceOfBatch(address[] calldata _owners, uint256[] calldata _ids) external view returns (uint256[] memory);

    function retrievePhrase(address _owner, uint256 _phraseId) external view returns (uint256[] memory);

    function setApprovalForAll(address _operator, bool _approved) external;

    function isApprovedForAll(address _owner, address _operator) external view returns (bool);
}
```

## Rationale
[ERC1155](./eip-1155.md) together with [ERC721](./eip-721.md) are in the track of
representing crypto-assets with tokens. [EIP-3754](./eip-3754.md) and this standard
EIP-3788 aim to bring the utility side of NFTs to the surface.

### Ordering information
Compared with ERC1155, this standard is particularly useful in logographic
representations. Therefore, the ordering information in a batch of tokenIds is
maintained whereas such information is completed discarded in ERC1155. It is not
a problem in ERC1155 since no valuable information is encoded in the order of
tokenIds, however, in this standard, as illustrated above, it is crucial in
decoding the unicodes of a sequence of logographs in the correct order.

### `URI`
To further distinguish this standard from ERC1155, `URI`s are not part of the
implementation of this standard. No external information is required to be encoded
with the tokens. TokenIds are the sole source of valueble information to transfer
valuable information.

### Phrase and sentence
In a language system, chracters in a batch form a phrase or even a sentence. To
retrieve it effectively, a phraseId is introduced. The phrases or sentences are
not meant to be disseminated but rather kept in storage as a form of assets,
which can be retrieved and restored, but not transferred. The tokens themselves,
however, are able to be transferred.

## Backwards Compatibility
[EIP-3754](./eip-3754.md) is a pre-requisite to this standard.

## Reference Implementation
https://github.com/simontianx/ERC3788

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
