---
sip: 112
title: ETH Wrappr
status: Proposed
author: bojan, kaleb (@kaleb-keny)
discussions-to: https://research.synthetix.io/
created: 2020-02-15
---

<!--You can leave these HTML comments in your merged SIP and delete the visible duplicate text guides, they will not appear and may be helpful to refer to if you edit it again. This is the suggested template for new SIPs. Note that an SIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your SIP, please use an abbreviated title in the filename, `sip-draft_title_abbrev.md`. The title should be 44 characters or less.-->

## Simple Summary
<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Simply describe the outcome the proposed changes intends to achieve. This should be non-technical and accessible to a casual community member.-->
Allow users to wrap ETH and get sETH

## Abstract
We propose to deploy a new contract that accepts deposits in ETH and in return mints sETH in the user's wallet. After successful ETH deposit, users' ownership over ETH is transferred to Synthetix protocol. Wrappr is a conditionally bidirectional contract, meaning that if it holds ETH in its reserve, it will accept deposits in sETH and releases ETH.
ETH can be unwrapped at any point by anyone after the corresponding amount of sETH is sent back and effectively burned.

## Motivation
<!--This is the problem statement. This is the *why* of the SIP. It should clearly explain *why* the current state of the protocol is inadequate.  It is critical that you explain *why* the change is needed, if the SIP proposes changing how something is calculated, you must address *why* the current calculation is innaccurate or wrong. This is not the place to describe how the SIP will address the issue!-->
We are experiencing a chronic shortage of Synths which is reflected on the market where Synths are being constantly traded above their peg since mid-2020 as can be seen here on [CRV](https://www.curve.fi/trade/susdv2/SUSD-USDC/6h). 
Even with the introduction of Multi-Collateral Loans in SIP-97, problems with the peg persisted. One explanation is that those loans are relatively capital inefficient since they require over-collateralization and thus are not effective tools for arbitrage and bringing synths to peg. 


## Specification
<!--The specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature, there are five sections
1. Overview
2. Rationale
3. Technical Specification
4. Test Cases
5. Configurable Values
-->

### Overview
<!--This is a high level overview of *how* the SIP will solve the problem. The overview should clearly describe how the new feature will be implemented.-->
sETH is freshly minted whenever a user deposit ETH into the contract. The user can deposit any amount desired however, this is subject to not exceeding the `maxETH` configurable via SCCP. 
There is no duration, interest rate or collateralization ratio, as any user can at any time buy back the  ETH deposited in the contract by burning sETH.
Minters benefit as minting sETH and burning sETH  are subject to a  `mintingFeeRate` and  `burningFeeRate`,  both of which are paid to the fee pool after conversion into `sUSD`. 

### Rationale
<!--This is where you explain the reasoning behind how you propose to solve the problem. Why did you propose to implement the change in this way, what were the considerations and trade-offs. The rationale fleshes out what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->
The main purpose of this proposal rests on the following points:
 - Allowing ETH holders to easily enter and exit Kwenta with the least amount of friction possible. This venue is more efficient than trading ETH for synths on an AMM,  due to the slippage. In addition, the current loan program bears collateralization as mentioned previously which cannot be lowered due to the collateralization and interest rate levied being undifferentiated across different borrowing options.  
-  The contract would  release sETH during times of surging demand and absorb extra synth supply when that demand recedes. Therefore it would automatically act as a peg balancing layer that allows arbers to enter and exit with the least friction possible, helping align the different [pegs](https://www.curve.fi/seth/). One arb example, would be to mint sETH against ETH and swap the sETH for ETH on CRV. 
- The debt pool would be mostly neutral initially as the increase in sETH supply would be offset by the increase in ETH locked in the wappr contract. However, as users swap the freshly minted sETH to other synths, this would lead to a reduction in the sETH skew as ETH locked acts as a counter-weight against the long sETH position, as the total debt calculation would be reduced by the amount of ETH locked in the contract. Hence, the need to incentivize farmers to assume a short sETH positions would be decreased.
- The minting and burning fees  effectively create a new revenue stream for minters who would be effectively get a cut from the profit generated by actors arbitraging points of inefficiency. 
- The pressure to fix the peg by reducing the collateralization ratio (increasing the solvency risk on minters) is somewhat reduced by having this contract at the spartan's council disposal, as another tool to help steer the peg towards parity (by changing the minting & burning fee as well as the `maxETH` parameter).

### Technical Specification
One contract is essentially required to be deployed:
- `wrappr.sol` which is able  to mint `sETH` against ETH deposited and release ETH against `sETH` burned. 

The entry points for users on`wrappr.sol`  implements the following interface.
```
interface IWrappr.sol {
    function mint() external payable;

    function burn(uint amount) external;
}
```

### Test Cases
- Given that a user has `u` amount of ETH and the contract has `c` amount of ETH in spare capacity
  - Given that `u` is strictly larger than `c(1+mintFeeRate)`
    - When the user attempts deposit `u` ETH into the contract
      - ✅ Then it succeeds and the following take place:
	      - `c` ETH is locked up in the contract
	      - `c(1-mintFeeRate)` is minted into the user's wallet in sETH
	      - `c*mintFeeRate` worth of sETH is sent to the fee pool in the form of sUSD
	      - `u - c` worth of ETH is refunded back to the user
  - Given that `u` is strictly  lower  than  `c(1+mintFeeRate)`
    - When the user attempts deposit `u` ETH into the contract
      - ✅ Then it succeeds and the following take place:
	      - `u` ETH is locked up in the contract
	      - `u(1-mintFeeRate)` is minted into the user's wallet in sETH
	      - `u*mintFeeRate` worth of sETH is sent to the fee pool in the form of sUSD
 - Given that the contract's capacity is zero, as `maxETH` is locked in the contract
   - When the user attempts deposit ETH into the contract
     - ❌ Then the transaction reverts due to max capacity being reached

- Given that a user has `u` amount of sETH and the contract holds  `c` amount of ETH
  - Given that `u` is strictly larger than `c(1+burnFeeRate)` 
    - When the user attempts to draw out  ETH from the contract by burning `u` sETH 
      - ✅ Then it succeeds and the following take place:
	      - `c` ETH is sent to the user
	      - `c` sETH is burned
	      - `c * burnFeeRate` worth of sETH is sent to the fee pool in the form of sUSD
	      - `u - c(1+burnFeeRate)` worth of sETH is refunded back to the user
  - Given that `u` is strictly lower than  `c(1+burnFeeRate)`
    - When the user attempts to draw out ETH from the contract by burning `u` sETH
      - ✅ Then it succeeds and the following take place:
	      - `u (1-burnFeeRate)` worth of  ETH is sent to the user
	      - `u * burnFeeRate` worth of sETH is sent to the fee pool in the form of sUSD
	      - `u (1 - burnFeeRate)` sETH is burned
 - Given that the contract's holds no ETH
   - When the user attempts draw out ETH from the contract by burning sETH
     - ❌ Then the transaction reverts due to the contract being out of ETH

### Configurable Values (Via SCCP)
<!--Please list all values configurable via SCCP under this implementation.-->
For the wrappr contract, the following values must be set:
- `maxETH` the maximum amount of ETH held by contract.
- `mintFeeRate` the fee for depositing ETH into the contract.
- `burnFeeRate` the fee for buning sETH and releasing ETH from the contract

### Proposed Initial Values
The following values are proposed as an initial configuration:
- `maxETH` 5,000
- `mintFeeRate` 5 bp
- `burnFeeRate`  5 bp
 
## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
